The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Salvation Army in Switzerland


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.

Title: The Salvation Army in Switzerland

Author: Josephine Elizabeth Grey Butler





Release date: September 15, 2026 [eBook #79586]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Dyer brothers, 1883

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/79586

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned images of public domain material from the Google Books project.)




*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SALVATION ARMY IN SWITZERLAND ***




Transcriber’s Note:

New original cover art included with this eBook is granted to the public domain.





THE

SALVATION ARMY

IN

SWITZERLAND.





BY

JOSEPHINE E. BUTLER.


London:

DYER BROTHERS,

AMEN CORNER, PATERNOSTER ROW;

PEWTRESS AND CO.,

28, LITTLE QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS, W.C.

1883.





London:

Printed by Pewtress & Co.,

Steam Printing Works,

28, Little Queen Street, Lincoln’s Inn Fields, W.C.





CONTENTS.




CHAPTER I.



The Author’s Reasons for taking up the Question of Legal Justice in connection with the Salvation Army.—Opinions of M. Sautter de Blonay and others.—Evangelizing of the Masses.—Salvation by the Police.—Salvation through the Preaching of the Gospel.—Attitude of the Evangelical Alliance in Switzerland.

CHAPTER II.



Narrative of the Work in Geneva.—Ringleaders of Disturbances.—Protection of Vice.—M. Héridier and the Genevan Government.—Madame de Gasparin.—Decree Closing the Meetings.—Petition of Genevan Citizens.—Falsification of a Cantonal Regulation.—Expulsion of Miss Booth and Miss Charlesworth.

CHAPTER III.



More detailed Account of the Spiritual Work in Geneva.—The Public Ministry of Women.—Meetings in the Hall of the Reformation, &c.—Encounter between the Powers of Light and Darkness.—Testimony of Converts and Others.—Prolonged Conflict.

CHAPTER IV.



Miss Booth’s Appeal to the Geneva Council of State.—Its Rejection of her Appeal.—The Appeal to the Federal High Council.—Reply of the Federal Council to her Appeal.—Remarks thereon.—Work in the Canton de Vaud.—Continuance of Persecution.

CHAPTER V.



Noble Proclamation of the Grand Council of Neuchâtel.—Speedy Departure of that Government from Just Principles.—Meetings in the Hotel Mont Blanc.—Persecution.—Rowdyism.—Houses of Private Citizens Attacked.—Report of the Neuchâtel Council of State on the Salvation Army.—Petitions and Counter-Petitions.—Debate in the Grand Council.—The Unjust Decree.



CHAPTER VI.



The Work Extended to other Cantons.—“It is John the Baptist whom I Beheaded.”—A Vital Warfare.—The Baptism of Fire.—Great Meeting in the Jura Forest.—Arrest of Miss Booth and Capt. Becquet.—Re-entrance of the Canton of Geneva.—Funeral of Wyssa.—The Arrest in the Cemetery.—Sent Across the Frontier.

CHAPTER VII.



Imprisonment of Miss Booth and Capt. Becquet at Neuchâtel.—The Trial.—M. Cornaz, Minister of Justice and Police, endeavours to intimidate the Jury.—Popular Excitement.—Crowded Court.—Telegraphic Message from Lord Granville.—Speeches of the Public Prosecutor and the Lawyers for the Defence.—Miss Booth’s Defence.—Verdict of Acquittal.—Public Meeting to demand expulsion of Salvationists.

CHAPTER VIII.



M. Audeoud defies the Genevan Authorities.—He reads aloud from the Penal Code, and they retire, defeated.—Petitions and Protests.—Switzerland inundated by Foreigners.—Difficulties of true Swiss Patriots in the present times.—Justice.—The Hope of the Future.





THE

SALVATION ARMY IN SWITZERLAND.





CHAPTER I.





It was the hand of a woman which struck the first blow in Switzerland against the work of the Salvation Army, resulting in a course of action on the part of the authorities of that country which has produced astonishment and a righteous indignation in every breast in which there is any sense of justice and of respect for liberty. If, as a woman, I can in any degree vindicate the cause of justice outraged in the person of a fellow woman, a compatriot, I shall be relieved of a solemn sense of responsibility.

I can, in fact, no longer hold my peace. I have withheld any expression of opinion hitherto, because of the love and respect I have for Switzerland, the country in which I have been so frequently resident. In common with all my countrymen and women we love that land, not only because of its unparalleled beauty and the health and repose we have so often sought and found here, but because we believed it was a free and a God-fearing and a law-abiding people, into whose midst strangers were constantly welcomed. We believed that it was a land in which liberty and human dignity were respected, a land where the extremes of wealth and poverty being unknown, there was an absence of many ills and sorrows which afflict our own country; a land in which, since it was penetrated by the light of the Reformation, absolute religious liberty had secured the free evangelising of the people, as well as open discussion of all important questions.

This was the general impression among my countrymen concerning Switzerland. The events which have recently transpired have opened our eyes to the fact that the elements above mentioned, forming some of the essential conditions of a nation’s welfare, have been undergoing a gradual process of undermining and decay; and we are forced to look back over fifty years or more of the past history of that country in order to read rightly the meaning of these startling events. Such a retrospect reveals above all things a decay of religious faith. This in itself is sufficient to account for the undermining of liberty, of respect for individual right, and of reverence for womanhood. These are followed by violations, repeated and persisted in, not alone of the written Constitution of the country, but of the first principles accepted by republican peoples—the principles of justice, and of equality of all citizens before the law, as well as the principles of international honour in the maintaining inviolate of treaties made with foreign nations in the interests of freedom and of peace.

A few words of personal explanation seem to be expedient, in respect to my own participation in the present conflict. For fourteen years I have been engaged in a work, now sufficiently widely known, a conflict in which the opposing parties respectively attack and defend the identical principles which are now at stake in the legal conflict into which the Salvationists have been forced to enter. The Federation for which I work, primarily the opponent of officially legalised vice, has found itself inevitably drawn into the sacred duty of publicly defending throughout the world the highest principles which govern human society,—constitutional liberty, the rights of the individual, respect for law, equality of all citizens before the law, and just and impartial administration of the laws. The Federation, so far as its representatives are Christian, holds up everywhere and on all occasions the principle of individual right and personal dignity on the basis of Christ’s teaching concerning the value of the individual soul, a value to be measured only by the price paid for its redemption. The difficulty which the Federation has met with in the propagation of the above-named great principles lies chiefly in the fact that we have been ordained, so to speak, to contend for them in the case of individuals who are the least interesting of all human beings to society, in the person of the most despised, the weakest, and, as men of the world express it, the most worthless of human creatures, namely, the outcast woman. Nevertheless, (or perhaps by the very reason of the low and despised estate of her whose defence the Federation has undertaken), the conflict on behalf of great principles fought out in her case has been extraordinarily fruitful, and has carried its vitalizing influence more or less into every civilized country. We expected such a result, because we took our stand on eternal and undying principles of truth and of justice.

On re-visiting Switzerland this year, I saw the very principles for which we have so long contended, violated in the person, not of one of these poor outcasts, but in that of a young English woman of pure and holy character and life, a friend, a sister in Christ, one whose only motive of action is a deep compassion for our poor sinful and suffering humanity, and a desire to give her whole being for the fulfilment of her portion of responsibility in the gathering in of the harvest of souls for which the Lord of the harvest is waiting. I asked myself, “can I stand still, silent, in the presence of such a collision as this between the great principles I have been accustomed to defend, and the egotism and injustice of those who have openly violated them, of those Christians even who being ‘at ease in Zion,’ are,—unconsciously it may be,—abetting the betrayers of liberty of conscience in this land?” I have said that I hesitated to speak, because the facts to be recorded are not honourable to Switzerland. But is it the true heart of Switzerland, is it the worthy portion of Swiss citizenship which are represented by those at present in possession of political power? No. There are leading men, and many men and women of every class there who have not forgotten the honourable traditions of their noble past. There has been a terrible decay of religious faith, but there are yet believers; there is a great increase of the class of “jouisseurs,” of those who live for material ends alone, of drunkards, of careless livers, of cynics, of vicious and sensual men; yet there is a people within this people who are as a salt to prevent universal corruption. My respect and love for this true people of Switzerland embolden me to expose without mercy the violations of justice, the infidelity, and the unworthy spirit of those who at this day are misrepresenting that country before the world. Again, I have hesitated somewhat to speak, because of the counsels of some of my fellow-workers in the Federation who, strongly objecting to the methods of evangelizing adopted by the Salvation Army, or not fully believing the message delivered by them, judge that it might be disadvantageous to the work of the Federation for one of its prominent members to be identified with them even to the extent of protesting against an injustice from which they are suffering. With all respect for the advices of certain members of our league, I have yet to learn that any good cause has ever suffered on account of the truthfulness of its advocates, and I am convinced that it is now my duty to record my deep personal convictions both on the legal and the religious side of the matter before us. I desire, however, while doing so, emphatically to declare, that I here speak as an individual only, and that I do not in the smallest degree implicate in what I say, the international Federation for which I labour, nor any single individual belonging to it. Above all, I wish it to be understood that what I now do is done without the concurrence, and, I may even say, without the knowledge, of those members of the Federation who reside in Switzerland, the country which is the seat of its Continental Administration.

One word further, expressive of my personal appreciation of the subject before us. I am not a member of the Salvation Army; I speak as an outside observer—an impartial observer so far as all questions of the methods and administration of the Army are concerned. The adoption of military titles seems to me open to objection; but I do not feel any duty imposed on me at this moment to criticize the methods employed. I believe—with a well-known and distinguished Swiss gentleman, M. Sautter de Blonay—that these things are external to the real and essential work of the Army. Madame de Gasparin endeavoured to prove that the military character of the Army identifies it with Jesuitism. M. Sautter replies: “The success of Jesuitism is not due alone to its military character, nor to the passive obedience required of its adherents in every act of life; but much more is it due to the absolute subjection imposed in matters of thought and of faith. Herein lies the strength of Jesuitism, but herein also lies its criminality. The Salvation Army is entirely Protestant—so entirely Protestant, that it imposes no special form of belief on its converts, (beyond the broad, essential doctrines of our Christian faith), but leaves them free to attach themselves to any among all the different religious denominations around them.” The outward organization may be modified, or even abandoned in its present form. It is the spirit and the essential work of the Army of which alone I desire to speak.

In respect to these I may be said to be a partizan. I am content, nay proud, to be one, in this sense. I thank God for the honour granted to me of being permitted, in however feeble a manner, to plead the cause of these evangelists. If we regard truly, and without prejudice, their motives of action, their spiritual power, and the astounding success which has been granted to them in their efforts for the lost, lapsed classes of society, we Christians may well fear to lift our hand or our voice against them; for God is with them. That they sometimes make mistakes, all must confess. Where do we find a church, a missionary agency, a Christian organization on the earth which is perfect, or which stands clear of blame in all respects, either as regards the occasional scandals caused by some of its individual members, or the doubtful tendency of some portion of its own practical direction? To me it has ever seemed to redound to the honour of God that He can and does make use of imperfect instruments in working out His perfect designs for the good of man. It is true, He requires His instruments in spiritual matters to be perfect in one sense—in one sense only—that is in the will to be His instruments, and to bear and to do His will in all things. He requires absolute sincerity and whole-hearted self-surrender in this respect; but beyond this, where shall we find among earth’s records of holy and vital work done for God, anything like perfection? Errors of judgment, and imperfections of many kinds have entered more or less into the work of all God’s chosen instruments since the days of the Patriarchs and Apostles. In the perfection and simplicity of a whole-hearted devotion to the world’s salvation, it seems to me, few, if any, Christians have ever excelled those of the despised and much criticized Salvation Army. What is their aim? To quote again M. Sautter de Blonay[1]—“As I understand it, their great thought is this:—the world is being lost, in a great revolt, ever more and more violent, against God. The Gospel of our Salvation, that restorer of the individual man, and, through the individual man, of Society, is unknown to the great mass of human beings, in spite of the efforts made, up to the present time, by Christians. The masses know only, on the one hand, what a materialistic science may have imparted to them; and, on the other, what they may have learned from a corrupt Roman Catholicism. At all costs, the Gospel—the glad tidings of Salvation—must be proclaimed to all the poor, and if the churches are not sufficient for the task, we must do it; and, if it is necessary, in order to speak to the Chinese, to dress as the Chinese dress, we will adopt that dress, &c.... It cannot be too much insisted upon, that what they offer is not offered to us—Christians—but to those who remain to this day outside the reach of all religious influences.”

As one who has seen something of the miseries and sorrows and degradation of humanity in the persons of the most disinherited of God’s creatures, it is impossible that I should not from the first moment have hailed with joy the advent of this advanced guard of God’s great “company of preachers” of the latter days by whom the gospel shall be announced to “every creature!” It is impossible but that my sympathies should go with them, and that I should praise God, daily, as I do, because the dark lot of the world’s outcasts is now beginning to be illuminated by a fuller ray of light and hope, because more of the hungry multitudes are beginning to be fed, and because the rebels begin to lay down their arms and to be reconciled to their God. I marvel how anyone whose heart has bled for the woes of humanity, and whose desire, (far above and beyond his loyalty to any particular sect or form of worship), is that this poor humanity may find God and be at rest, can fail to rejoice in what our eyes are at this day permitted to see. I fail to understand how such can find the heart or the leisure for endless criticism and reiterated attack on points which seem secondary and minor. I speak with all respect for those who differ from me, or who proclaim themselves at variance in matters of grave and primary import with the Salvation Army. I bear in mind also while I write, and thank God for, every Christian effort made and for all the noble work done by those whom He is calling to harvest work in every church and sect, even in those which most disapprove the methods of the Army.

For myself, however, I am prostrated in humiliation before God, because, (albeit this new evangelizing force was a dream of my childhood, and has been at all times the desire of my heart), I have, through the weakness of my faith, so late in life, recognised the possibility of its fulfilment, and only recognised that possibility when it is presented to me in part as a realized fact. But now I rejoice and thank God.

No doubt many of the ways of the Army are very repugnant to the more refined classes of Society; yet, in general their manner of dealing with the people appears to be excellently and beautifully adapted to win, comfort, instruct and control the classes whom they seek to save. I have been especially struck with their humanness; a quality much wanting in some Christian workers. It has been lately said, “Preachers and Christian workers are so busy about saving souls, that they forget that those whom they have to save are men and women.” Our Saviour, Jesus Christ, presented Himself to those who sought Him as a most complete Saviour, the Saviour of the soul and the body, of the whole being. He freed and blessed the whole man, woman, or child, who sought His aid.

We may imagine, a poor, uncared-for, perhaps guilty and police-hunted creature of our streets entering a church, and hearing a discourse concerning pardon and peace. He is touched; he feels that the preacher is full of concern and love for souls, for the souls of all those before him; and he has spoken of One who gave His life for the lost. The poor outcast of society leaves the church and mingles again in the crowd; he feels again that he, personally, is of no account to anyone, and is never sure after all that the message was for him, or that it is possible for anyone to care for him. He needs a human encounter, a living hand to grasp his, a personal recognition, in order to force into his dark and hopeless soul the knowledge that God loves him; he needs in fact that the assurance should come to him from the Eternal Father, as to the prophet of old, “thou hast found grace in My sight, and I know thee by name.” This, the human side of the work of ministering to souls, the Salvation Army understand well. They open the door of hope to the poor, to sinners, criminals, rebels, outcasts, by proclaiming the worth, the dignity, the preciousness of each individual man and woman among them. Their kindly smiles are ever ready, their friendly hands are always held out to grasp the hands of the dirtiest toilers in the holes and corners of our cities, hands stained with crime, even with blood! “Come! You are welcome! God loves you, God needs you,” is the word addressed to each and to all. Rude rebuffs and insulting conduct do not discourage them. They are ready with good-natured banter and repartee, with a humorous sally, or homely persuasion, as the case may be.

That exquisite gift of God to human nature—a sense of humour,—prevails largely among them, and is recognised by them as one of the attributes of human beings which is to be purified and made use of in His service. The solemn fears of some persons concerning the “eccentricities” of the Salvation Army may be attributed to some extent to their absolute incapacity for comprehending this almost universal attribute of at least the lower classes of human beings—this humorousness, this playfulness, which, delicately handled, aids and softens all our dealings with our fellow men. It is a quality which has undoubtedly a tendency to run to levity and coarseness, but on the other hand it is intimately allied with all that is most tender and sweet in human nature. Solemnity is not necessarily reverence. It required in my own case an effort of many years to emancipate myself from the dismal and repelling impression made upon me in childhood by attending some services in a Scottish Presbyterian Church. The very walk of the churchgoers as they approached the church, the artificially solemn manner and peculiarly lugubrious tones of the preacher, the slowness of utterance, the heavy hymn tunes!—these may be acceptable to persons of one character or age, peculiarly constituted; but the gloom, and estrangement, for a time, from all religious teaching that they worked in myself as a child lead me to think it probable they have had the same effect on many others—children not perhaps in age, but in knowledge and in judgment. On this subject, M. Sautter de Blonay writes:—“Now, in every nation the proportion of children is great. It is not only those who are yet immature in age who are in reality children, but all those may be called so in all classes of life, who in the domain of religion are novices in the higher gymnastics of the intellect and the conscience. It is these that the Salvation Army seeks to reach.... They have even expressed regret that believers, spiritual adults, have come, through curiosity, or some kind of sympathy to their meetings, for they felt that they had nothing to give to these.... It is undoubtedly a fact that in our churches, and even in our evangelizing fields of labour, we frequently understand very little how to speak to children in spiritual matters a language which they can understand. How often, I myself, who however am not altogether a child in this respect, after having listened in one of our places of worship, to a good and beautiful Christian dissertation, have left the place wearied, exhausted. I wanted a little fortifying, a little consolation, a little pure milk; and they gave me for nourishment a dish of arguments which my weak intelligence or my lassitude made me incapable of digesting. A child in music, I am unable to comprehend the high harmonies of the German masters; but the simple song of an Italian, with few notes, moves and charms me. Have we not often heard at the foot of our Jura some honest peasant woman declare that she liked much better to go to the little meetings of Madame —— than to the church or the chapel, because there she could understand at least what was said? In thus speaking, I do not attack the preaching which is in vogue in our churches: it is the fruit of our wholesome traditions; it must be respected, and may not be attacked without danger. I only maintain that though that teaching may nourish and edify the churches, it does not tend to enlarge them, and but very feebly attracts towards them the mass of our population. Those stragglers, wanderers, rebels against the religion of the churches are precisely the people whom the Salvation Army hope to attract by their innovations, (in form and method). It is possible that this reaction may go beyond what is just or useful. But when I look at the activity, the love of souls, the gentleness, the spirit of self-consecration of these our brothers—not only, as has been said, to the Army, but to God—when, on the other hand, I look at my own inactivity, and the comfort in which I live, I blush for myself, not for them.”

The Army no doubt owes some portion of its success in arresting the attention and awakening the interest of the lower classes to the fact that they never allow dullness to reign in their assemblies. Joy is permitted to have free expression among them. Gladness of heart on account of a newly found salvation, or of full soul-freedom gained, is more unconventionally expressed among the inhabitants of our city slums than it would be in a drawing-room conference or a cathedral or church filled with refined and educated people. The cry against the Army for its “irreverence” is often uttered in entire ignorance of the facts of that human society into the midst of which their influence has come as a light in a dark place. They are simple, ignorant people, those who scandalize us; they are a literal people; they interpret the Scriptures perhaps too literally. They read our Saviour’s words to His disciples, “rejoice ye, and leap for joy.” They read in the Hebrew prophets the reiterated call to sing and “make a noise,” to “shout for joy,” because “great is the Holy One in the midst of thee!” Moreover, they are actually filled with joy, with the irrepressible mirthfulness of prisoners loosed, of bondmen set free; they have no high poetic speech at command, they are not practised as we, in a more refined class, are, in the polite repression of every natural or spiritual emotion; and I, for one, neither blame nor wonder, therefore, when I see the pleasant quickening of the pulses induced by joy of heart, develop into some energetic physical movement, or a shout of praise set to an old familiar, rapid song-tune hitherto devoted to the service of folly or evil only. Can we justly blame the leaders of this great movement because they do not succeed in forming, or do not even think it wise to attempt to form out of these children of nature, (a very rough and unpolished nature), polished gentlefolks, or even such men and women as we meet in the decent lower middle class in England? It is the spontaneity, however, alone of all such outward expressions of the spiritual life which is their apology and raison d’être, and which alone gives them the genuine grace, which, in my eyes at least, they possess. If once they are studied for a certain rude effect, or are announced as something to be performed, they become puerile, unmeaning, and misleading. So far, however, as the leaders of the Army meetings give full permission for the spontaneous expression of feeling, I take it they are wise,—wise in respect of that portion of the people whom they chiefly desire to save.

Our fellow Christians in Switzerland may possibly be scandalized by the latitude granted in England to the eccentricities of revivalists. Although my main object here is to present a true picture to English readers of what has recently occurred in Switzerland, on the other hand, I wish that what the Salvation Army has done for England, should also be known in Switzerland. If an adequate conception could be formed by the religious teachers in Switzerland of the actual condition of our great cities, they would cease, I think, to condemn any methods by which the awful problems presented by it may be brought nearer to their solution. The population of London exceeds that of the whole of Switzerland. We have, besides, our immense industrial cities of the provinces with their teeming populations. Every evil, every difficulty of modern life is proportionately magnified, and the sources of true life are choked, so to speak, by the very exuberance of life itself, the seething, straining human life, which has become a mere desperate or sullen struggle for its own existence, and for defence against insupportable pressure on every side. Christian effort has been put forth constantly and vigorously. Much good work is done among the poor. The churches have taxed their ingenuity in many directions. But below the stratum of the decent, struggling poor, is a lower stratum still of beings who are scarcely reached at all by Christians of the better classes: these are below poverty, and beyond the pale of all civilizing influences. Again, beneath this, deeper down still, is another stratum of humanity—a class of beings of whose very existence statesmen and philanthropists only become aware at long intervals, when some shock and upheaving of the political or social ground brings up to the light of day these thousands of miserable beings—unwashed, uncombed, scarcely clothed, hungry, violent, revengeful, sullen, and only subdued for long periods, not by any principle of self-restraint, but by the weight of a dull despair. We have wondered, perhaps, in passing through the streets when some great public event had called up to the light this underground population, whence they come, how they live, where it is that these multitudes are stowed away, above all, what is their future, and the future of the nation which harbours them. There are among them men scarcely human in appearance, birds of prey, bull-dogs, low-browed, and cunning; wrinkled and old and careworn even in youth; full of deadly hatred against their fellow men and against society. Can we wonder at it? If such were our own condition, and our hearts had never been visited by a ray of heaven’s light, should not we also hate? These men are the terror of the police at all times; of our statesmen and political men occasionally. We walk and live above a volcano which may burst forth, nay will burst forth, one of these days, unless these incipient elements of impending revolution can be cleared away; and how is this to be done? The Salvation Army has given us an answer; it has brought to us at least the hope of a solution. It is these dangerous, degraded and forgotten beings, these haters, these violent spirits, to whom, first, the Salvationists addressed themselves. They have sought them out in the lowest and most dangerous of their haunts; they have tried the power of the name of Jesus, and invoked the transforming influence of the Holy Ghost where they had never been so fully tried before; and they have seen the wild beast changed to the lamb, the hater filled with kindness and pity, the coarse and low and vicious become pure and gentle and holy in life. There is no testimony in favour of the Salvation Army half so powerful or so eloquent as the testimony of these transfigured lives and faces. Those who have not seen them can scarcely imagine them. I have seen them.

It happened that I passed one day by the door of a hall in a crowded part of London where Salvationists of the humblest class were praying. I entered. At the moment my mind was burdened by thoughts connected with the difficulty and sadness of my own special mission. I kneeled in a corner, endeavouring to free myself of the burden, in prayer. I suppose that some tears or look of sadness attracted the attention of some of those near; for I became aware that around me there was a little group, who, although I was a perfect stranger to them, had taken my burden on their own hearts, and were pleading for me. “Hear her, Lord,” they said, “O give her all her heart’s desire! Lord, we don’t know what she is wanting; but O give her all she asks, and that soon.” Wonderful kindness! blessed ministering! And who were these ministers? The poorest of the people, men and women who had been unearthed from those dark dwellings of that lowest stratum of society I have spoken of. One of the group was a young “jail-bird,” a discharged prisoner, of perhaps eighteen or twenty years of age, lean, lantern-jawed, gaunt, clothed almost in rags, with that look of prematurely developed acuteness and sorrowfulness which stamps the countenances of the young in that class. Years of misery and crime had set their mark on his poor features, but through and above all shone the new-found happiness. The expression of his lean, sunken face as he raised his eyes in prayer for me, a stranger to him, reminded me of pictures I have seen, in Italian galleries, of St. Francis, the apostle of poverty, in rapt communion with God. It was a brightness such as one may see among the Alps when the glory of the setting sun shines upon some worn and storm-blasted peak, and it stands out radiant, as one of “God’s sentinels” bathed in a light not of earth. Parenthetically I may remark that if I—who am not friendless or lonely—was so deeply touched by the loving intercession on my behalf of these poor saved outcasts, these strangers, how much must such ministering attract and win converts to God and adherents to the Army from among those who have not my advantages, and who perhaps have never met with a word of true sympathy before?

“But,” I hear many say, “is not this a temporary emotion? Does it last?” “Yes, it lasts;” I reply. None can say that there is never any falling away; but there are solid and lasting results which can be given to those who doubt;—facts and figures in abundance. There are magistrates and judges finding little or nothing to do at assizes, in towns where crime had before been rife; whole streets reformed; salvation, spiritual, moral and social—granted to families, and to entire neighbourhoods.

The modern fetishism, faith in the police, and in government by police, is a danger and delusion towards which all civilized nations are rushing more or less rapidly. It is a tyranny which establishes itself no less under the shelter of a liberal or democratic Government, than under an autocracy or empire. It has become in some nations a standing menace to liberty, and an embarrassment even to the governments which, having once given way to its encroachments, in vain attempt later to restrict its functions. This is the power by which it is imagined that society may be controlled and governed, and by which virtue and morality may be secured. Fatal delusion! England herself is blinded as much as any other nation to the dangers of this police rule. She is forging, link by link, a chain for her own enslavement, which she will find it difficult to break when she awakes to the fact that in forging it she has cast down constitutional safeguards, and abandoned true self-government. There is a cry arising from the nations, “What must we do to be saved,” politically and socially saved? For the most part they have recourse in their extremity to their fancied saviour, the police. New laws are created and placed entirely for their execution in the hands of the police. The power of the police is re-enforced continually. The most august functions are exercised by it; the most delicate problems of our social and domestic life are abandoned to it for solution. It can make “regulations which have the force of law,” may interpret law without recourse to legal authority, and exercises over a vast portion of the citizens a power (a tyranny, rather) which is practically irresponsible.

Against this encroaching fetishism, this darkening tyranny of the future, this hopeless attempt to regenerate and rule society by outward compulsion, what have we to set? Nothing, nothing, except a return to first principles, to the inflexible rule of justice, to the respect of man by man; nothing except a renewal of faith in divine and eternal truth, a moral regeneration, a practical return to the simplicity of Christ; nothing except the preaching of the everlasting gospel to every creature, and a full realization of the gift of the Spirit bestowed at first on the day of Pentecost, and to be bestowed again in like manner when there shall be found faith in the earth to claim the full accomplishment of the promise.

If God who uses the weak, the foolish things of this world, the things that are not, to do what the strong, the wise, the firmly established cannot do, shall we murmur against Him, or refuse to rejoice in His work? If He pleases to rebuke His Church and people, and to “provoke them to jealousy by a people that are no people,” shall we suffer our jealousy to express itself by criticism, blame, bitterness, persecution, violation of law, illegal judgments and interdictions?

The appearance in our days of this wonderful Salvation Army is a crucial test above all things of the existence among Christians of true love for humanity and zeal for the salvation of men. How is it that in certain parts of Switzerland, where there are the most perfect schools of Theology, ministerial training and doctrinal teaching the most careful and complete, so few are gathered in daily from the multitudes who are living merely for this world’s interests or for gross pleasures? I think it is because the hearts of the pastors and other Christians are not filled with that holiest passion, that unquenchable fire of love for souls which “beareth all things, endureth all things,” which literally gives up all for Christ, and is able to do and to dare all things, even unto death.

It would scarcely have been possible for injustice to have been pushed so far as it has been against the Salvationists in Switzerland, had not the Churches largely given their sanction to that injustice by their attitude of silence, or of displeasure against what they may have deemed an impertinent or needless encroachment on their own spiritual territory. It is difficult to express the sorrow of heart, the consternation which the contemplation of this part of the question has awakened in some souls. The spirit manifested by many professing Christians is very far from the spirit of Christ. “We saw one casting out devils in Thy name,” said the disciples, “and we forbade him, because he followeth not with us.” “Forbid him not,” was the Master’s reply, “for he that is not against us is for us,” and, “there is no man that casteth out devils in My name that can lightly speak evil of Me.” This selfsame sign does follow the Salvationists; in His name they do cast out evil spirits. It cannot be denied. In the spiritual power that has been granted to them consists the rebuke given to professing Christians out of whom the life has died. In this matter judgment has begun at the household of God, and no sentence of expulsion against the evangelists will cause that judgment to cease.

The antagonism of the Christian portion of the community to the Salvation Army has been much more marked in Switzerland than in our own country. Nevertheless there is much to take to heart in this matter among us, English. It has been said that the concurrence of three social Powers is necessary for the suppression of the messengers of an unwelcome truth, viz., the Government, the rough, and the religious professor. Solemn and painful thoughts are suggested by the fact that there are Christians in Switzerland, (happily with many marked exceptions,) who have, more or less unconsciously, aided their godless Government and the mob of persecutors in this matter. The greater their success in driving out from their midst the foreign evangelists, the greater will be the loss to souls and the ultimate dishonour to the authorities who, encouraged by the tacit sanction of Christians, have committed an injustice, the sound of which will ring throughout Christendom. It seems that so great has been the “ease in Zion” in that country, that no attack could have been made upon the kingdom of darkness, without a general uneasiness, excitement and resentment being felt, not only among the irreligious, but among Zion’s watchmen who have slept. Nevertheless, the very baptism of suffering through which the persecuted Salvationists have passed, may be the precursor of renewed spiritual life for that nation. Such is our hope and confidence. The Salvationists (I do not speak of the English, but of the Swiss promoters of the movement,) are becoming stronger every day; while a movement is already in course of inauguration in those very cantons whose governments have united in an act of injustice, with the view of establishing a league in defence of civil and religious liberty.

Before quitting this portion of my subject, it is just that I should record the fact that a number of respected citizens of Geneva, who were members of the “Evangelical Alliance,” have resigned their membership of the Genevan Committee of that league on account of the refusal of that Committee to act, in this instance, in favour of religious liberty.

The Evangelical Alliance was founded in 1846, one of its first objects being the defence of religious liberty.[2] It does not impose on its members any sacrifice of their private religious views, but it holds them to an engagement not to depart, in any discussion of their views, from the true spirit of Christian brotherhood. It has interposed in favour of persecuted Christians in Europe and elsewhere, sending deputations to various Governments to demand the repeal of oppressive laws or the liberation of prisoners confined for conscience sake. Rarely have these interventions been unsuccessful. The Alliance interposed on behalf of the Madiaï in Florence, of Matamoros and his companions in Spain, of Missionaries and of converted Musselmans in Turkey and in Syria, of persecuted Lutherans in the Baltic provinces of Russia, of Lutheran Pastors at Hesse-Darmstadt, of Baptists in Germany, Russia, Sweden and Switzerland, of French Missionaries among the Basutos, of English in New Caledonia, of Nestorians in Prussia, of the Mortara family in Rome, of Jews in Russia, of Communities founded by American Missionaries in Upper Egypt, of a Pastor imprisoned in Spain, of Reformers in Bohemia, &c., &c. There are Committees of this Association at Geneva, and several other Swiss towns, these different Committees forming a special branch of the Evangelical Alliance with its centre at Berne. The refusal of this Swiss branch of the Alliance to act on the occasion with which we are dealing was so great a shock to certain members of those Committees that they saw there was no mode of action open to them except to resign their membership of that branch. Their resignation was couched in the following terms:—

“Geneva, March 22nd, 1883.





“To the President of the Committee of the Evangelical Alliance at Geneva.





“Dear Sir,—The decision which was taken in the meeting of March 15th by the Geneva Committee of the Evangelical Alliance, lays upon us the painful duty of withdrawing from this society in accordance with a formal vote.

“At a meeting on March 12th, the Committee, after two long deliberations, at a three weeks’ interval, resolved first, to address an appeal to the Council of State of our canton in favour of religious liberty, which had been violated in connection with the Salvation Army. Secondly, to send an address to the Rev. W. Booth in order to express to him in a friendly way the objections and fears which several of the regulations and proceedings of his association are raising in the minds of most of the members of the Committee, and also to let him know that an appeal in favour of liberty for his work had been made to the cantonal authorities.

“In the meeting of the 15th, same month, the Committee, in consequence of several facts which had occurred in their midst, no important outward circumstance having changed the question itself, repealed the resolution of the 12th, and decided that nothing should be done. We are convinced that in acting thus, the Committee has failed to see the duties which are laid on the corps representing in Geneva the great and noble idea of the Evangelical Alliance. All the traditions of this association, its former achievements, the spirit even which called it to life, constitute it the faithful watchman of religious liberty.

“The general conference held at Geneva in 1861, had even passed a resolution which has been referred to, both in the motion presented to the Committee by one of us on February 19th last, and in the draft of the letter to the Council of State proposed the 12th of March by another member of the Committee.

“This resolution runs as follows:—

“‘The Committee of the Evangelical Alliance established in the various countries of the world are invited to watch over the interests of religious liberty, to look carefully to any breach it might suffer, to examine thoroughly all communications made on this subject, and to correspond at once with the other Committees of the Alliance, to deliberate on the best means of re-establishing or maintaining this precious liberty.’

“Now we have seen with our own eyes, in this our town, so proud of its light and its liberties, in this our country open to the free expounding and discussion of all ideas, even of the newest, the strangest, the most anti-Christian, the most anti-social—we have seen religious meetings exposed to violent and rude attacks, and finally prohibited by the Government. Harmless persons have been persecuted, insulted and ill-treated for the sake of religion; strangers have been brutally expelled by the police without having been guilty of any other fault than that of holding their own opinions and their own religious practices. And the Geneva Committee of the Evangelical Alliance considers it right to maintain silence before such facts!

“What then will be the attitude of the Alliance, if called upon in future as it has already been in the past, to make common cause with some of its members in a delegation in order to remonstrate with some Sovereign who may have tolerated such enormities on the part of some of his governors of provinces, prefects or pachas? As for us, we believe that we must cast out the beam in our own eye before trying to pull out the mote or even the beam which may be in our brother’s eye.

“Is it possible to say that religious liberty is not at stake? Perhaps not our own religious liberty. And yet, are there any among us Geneva people who do not feel that a blow has been struck at their own right of seeking edification where they choose to find it?

“True, our religious liberty remains untouched for the present; but is our own liberty the only liberty to be respected? None can deny that the prohibited meetings were religious meetings. Whatever efforts may be made to attribute another character to these meetings, this point is indisputable.

“Opinions on the doctrines and proceedings of the Salvation Army may vary, and they do vary; but religious liberty is not defined only as liberty for doctrines and religious forms which are approved of and sufferable; it also means liberty for doctrines and forms which are disapproved. So long as there is no crime, no contravention of the laws, full liberty is granted. Crimes and contraventions of law come within the province only of the tribunals. Religious liberty then, has been violated; it is still violated, and it will continue to be violated so long as either the decrees which prohibit the meetings of the Salvation Army or those which have ordered the expulsion of some of its members continue to exist.

“England, with its Established Church, France, with its tendencies so unfavourable to Christianity, both tolerate the Salvation Army; Geneva, with its pretensions to largeness and to liberality, refuses to tolerate it! The Committee of the Evangelical Alliance ought not to have passed over in silence such a state of things.

“Our Committee ought also to have acted from another point of view. The Evangelical Alliance has intervened in favour of Jews, Roman Catholics, and many others. How much more important are the duties entailed on such a league when the liberty at stake is that of brothers who boldly hold aloft the standard of Jesus Christ, and whose faith and hope are the same as our own.

“We take objection to several points in their method of evangelisation, perhaps also to several secondary points of doctrine held by them; these objections are felt more strongly by some of our members than by others; but we cannot deny that the Salvationists whom we have seen at work at Geneva all bear the character of faithful, convinced and devoted Christians. This being so, the Evangelical Alliance which exists precisely for the purpose of manifesting to the world the essential unity existing among all the disciples of Jesus, our Saviour and our God, a unity which rises above all the diversities which, under the name of churches or sects, have been created by human weakness; the Evangelical Alliance which professes to gather into one group all who seek their salvation at the foot of the cross, is silent in face of this prohibition of meetings for prayer! It contemptuously passes by, under the pretext that many of its members have no sympathy with these people,—the Salvationists,—or that they even entirely disapprove their mode of action. We cannot, we will not, follow the Alliance in adopting such an attitude. It is true that we, the undersigned, have no authority to speak in the name of the Evangelical Alliance; but since the Geneva Committee, who alone could have done it, refuses to protest, we do so in the only way in our power;—we withdraw from the Geneva Committee.

“But on leaving the Geneva Committee, we declare openly that we do not mean to leave the Evangelical Alliance itself. On the contrary, our wish is to be faithful to the spirit of the Alliance. We remain members of it, and we remain attached to it with all our heart. Nor do we mean to break the bonds of fraternity and of co-operation which unite personally several of us with many members of your Committee. A clear position taken on the ground of principles can only make us more desirous of showing our personal sympathies to brothers with whom we are separated on a special point.

“Yours respectfully, &c.,



[Signed]      “Th. Audeoud, J. P. Dardier, Fr. de Morsier, A. de Meuron, James Balmer, D. Lenoir, P. Bourne, Gd. Filliol, G. Tophel, Ph. Privat.”





The “Inner Mission” of France holds much the same position in regard to this matter as the Swiss branch of the Evangelical Alliance. One of its members having become an “Auxiliary” of the Army, was requested by the authorities of that Association to sign a paper promising that he would “request to have his name erased from the list of the Auxiliaries, and that henceforth he would take no part in any of their meetings public or private.” He declined to surrender his liberty to the extent of so doing, and in consequence was obliged to send in his resignation to the Committee of the Inner Mission.

I have here dwelt chiefly on the attitude of the religious world towards the invading army of Evangelists. Of the deadly hatred on the part of those outside all religious communions which they have encountered in Switzerland, I shall speak in the course of the subsequent narrative, in presenting the facts of the official and governmental action in the matter. With regard to the latter, English readers may be assured that there are many Swiss who are now fully awakened by the tyrannous conduct of the Cantonal and Federal Governments in this direction, to the extreme dangers of the “Radicalisme Autoritaire,” of which they have long been suspicious. They are asking themselves how long their political independence and unity are likely to last, or ought to last, under such conditions. The persecution of the Salvation Army presents itself to them as a question above all the minor and petty objections raised by the persecutors to excuse their own action—i.e., as a plain question of religious liberty of the most elementary kind. A Swiss gentleman writes:—“To my mind, this persecution aims at the suppression of all religion, not at one form of it alone. It is a pure piece of dogmatic atheism. France will not probably go so far as Switzerland seems now to be going. The suppression of the Salvation Army is only one step in the series which tends to the suppression of the Christian morality.”

But we have confidence, that whatever of tribulation and conflict may be at hand, these gloomiest predictions will not be fulfilled. For the work of the new Evangelists is prospering and progressing daily, both outside and in the Churches, even while its leaders are banished, or forbidden to meet and to speak.

Such has ever been the effect of attempts to stamp out a divine seed once sown, or to extinguish the spark of divine fire once kindled in the souls of God’s people. Go on, if you will, police, mobs and Governments, in the way on which you have entered! Persecute, forbid, spy, hunt, fine, insult and slay! You will only fortify the movement which you hate, and help to build up, on the strongest foundation which can be laid, the living Church of the future in Switzerland.





CHAPTER II.

Narrative of Facts.





I ask a patient perusal of the following facts. After such a perusal, I believe that the conviction of every reader will be, that the legal position of the Salvation Army in Switzerland is absolutely unassailable.

Neither the Federal nor the Cantonal Governments have succeeded—though straining the text of their laws to the uttermost in their endeavour to do so—in proving a single breach of the Law, properly understood, against the Army since it entered Switzerland in December, 1882. I shall comment later on the degree of the responsibility of the Army in the breach of Cantonal Orders acknowledged by Swiss Jurists themselves to be illegal in the sense of their being a violation of the Constitutional Laws of the Country.

It may be well at the outset to mention a few plain facts in order to disabuse the minds of the English public of a number of erroneous ideas which seem to be generally current with reference to the action and methods of the Salvation Army upon the Continent, and in Switzerland in particular.

1. Not a single placard or notice was ever posted in the Canton of Geneva which was not first approved and passed by the Police authorities themselves in conformity with their regulations. It was for the Swiss authorities to say whether any of the placards thus submitted to them were calculated unduly to excite the public mind. 2. Street processions, such as those which take place in England, being prohibited by the Genevese law, the Salvation Army never once even attempted to have such a procession, or any collective manifestation in the public streets. It is therefore needless to observe that no band of music belonging to the Salvation Army ever paraded the streets. Madame de Gasparin’s book, as well as the religious and secular Press, made frequent mention of drums, bands, &c. What is the fact? The only instruments ever used (in part due to the fact that the Salvation Army had not had time to form a band) were a cornet, two violins, and a piano, which were used in the private halls hired by the Salvation Army for its meetings.

From the commencement the leaders of the Salvation Army were very careful to observe the laws of the land; and since the persecutions, they have frequently challenged the authorities to prove them guilty of a single breach of their laws. Through the force of circumstances arising from the strong prohibitory laws created in the Canton of Geneva for the suppression of the Jesuits, the outward manifestations of the Salvation Army work were altogether devoid of some of the external features which characterize it in England.

The uniforms—very plain and inoffensive—and the Army titles, were retained; and women continued to preach the Gospel in meetings large and small.[3] These latter points have been eagerly seized upon by the opponents of the Army to swell the cry against them; but these do not afford any grounds of banishment and interdiction; they are not contraventions of any law.

The “Avant Courriers” of the Salvation Army arrived in Geneva in December, 1882. Mr. Clibborn held some preliminary Conferences in the Hall of the Reformation and in the Casino.

A Citizen of Geneva wrote:—“The rumours which had preceded the advent of the Salvation Army had excited some apprehensions among those who have at heart the interests of religion. But these apprehensions were for the most part allayed by the favourable impressions received at the meetings held by Mr. Clibborn. His object in holding these meetings was to lay before our public a simple account of the principles and aim of the Salvation Army; but the ardour and zeal of that true servant of God urged him from time to time to go further, and to address urgent appeals to the conscience of his hearers.”

The way being thus prepared, Catherine Booth arrived, accompanied by several friends, men and women. Opinions for and against the teaching and methods of the Army began now to be more strongly pronounced. Turbulent spirits in large numbers appeared on the scene, encouraged, as it is now well known, by the inactivity and even collusion of the police, and by the secret approval, well known to the mob of disturbers, of individuals in authority who, having been elevated to positions of power on the shoulders of this very mob, have undoubtedly sought to make capital, in their own interests and in the interests of the most unworthy of their electors, out of the persecution of the Salvation Army. The evening meetings began to be besieged by savages, the deadly enemies of all religion, seconded by a number of insolent youths to whom noise, especially if seasoned with personal insults, seemed to be a congenial amusement. The meetings were frequently broken up, by threats and uproar which endangered the personal safety of their promoters and the quieter part of the audience, who were consequently obliged to retire to smaller halls and less accessible localities. One of the journals of Geneva wrote thus of Miss Booth’s first meeting:—“Miss Booth was listened to with the greatest attention, and by the men present in the audience with respectful emotion. It would have required a heart of stone not to have been touched with the ardent piety, the deep love of souls, the joyful spirit of sacrifice which breathed and throbbed in the words of this noble young lady. One would have said it was a new Joan of Arc preaching against the Prince of this world a holy war of liberation and conquest.” The Geneva Citizen above quoted says:—“The police seemed from the beginning powerless to maintain order. At first it may have been supposed that this powerlessness was real and involuntary; but subsequent events have proved that there was a positive disinclination on the part of the police to suppress the disturbances, and that there was no real incapacity for doing so, if they had been so minded.” This was the moment in which the principle of religious liberty received its first deadly wound in Geneva. A kind of tremor seems to have been felt throughout the better instructed part of the population, when that blow was about to fall. Some endeavoured to throw off their uneasiness by declaring that the foreign visitors alone could be held responsible for any violation of religious liberty, and that they alone would feel the penalty. But far more numerous were the Genevan citizens who complained that they were prevented from receiving the spiritual help and blessing which they desired and had begun to find at the meetings, and more numerous still was the crowd of poor people attracted by simple curiosity to those meetings whose souls might have responded to the call to a better life.

As British subjects provided with passports and permits of residence in the Canton of Geneva, the members of the Army were entitled to all the benefits guaranteed in the “Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Establishment” of September 6, 1855, now in force between Switzerland and England.

The following are extracts from that Treaty:—

“The subjects of Her Britannic Majesty shall be admitted to reside in each of the Swiss Cantons on the same conditions and on the same footing as citizens of the other Swiss Cantons. In the same manner Swiss citizens shall be admitted to reside in all the territories of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, on the same condition and on the same footing as British subjects.”

“Consequently the subjects and citizens of either of the two contracting parties shall, providing they conform to the laws of the country, be at liberty, with their families, to enter, establish themselves, reside and remain in any part of the territories of the other.

“They may hire and occupy houses and warehouses for the purpose of residence and commerce, and may exercise, conformably to the laws of the country, any profession, business or occupation.”

In conformity with the provisions of this Treaty, full liberty has always been accorded to British subjects to hold evangelistic meetings in all parts of Switzerland, and the same holds good for the Swiss in England.

The meetings which the Salvationists had held for six weeks before objections were raised, were strictly within the bounds of the law. The placards announcing them were passed by the Municipal authorities before being affixed. There were no processions.[4] Politics were not touched in the meetings, and nothing was said which could provoke the hostility of any right-minded person. From the first, when the disturbances commenced, Colonel Clibborn took frequent occasion to consult with the Director of the Police, having always gone to his office when requested, and given him timely notice of all the meetings, and (as the Director himself admitted), having invariably fallen in with his counsel upon points which would facilitate the task of keeping order.

Several persons can be adduced as witnesses to the fact that the ringleaders in the disturbances were paid to act this part by several noted traffickers in vice in the city, and the latter were themselves frequently seen in the meeting inciting part of the audience to riot.

I cannot forbear remarking here on the grotesquely horrible and almost incredible fact that while the Government of Geneva suppresses religious meetings and forbids the poor and ignorant classes of the people to come in contact with a power which has already redeemed and elevated thousands in other lands who had formerly been the pests of society, it continues to grant licenses to the keepers of houses of debauchery, and to shield these diabolical institutions with its own august protection, well knowing them to be strongholds of Satan within whose walls every crime is perpetrated, and whose poisonous influence is extending like a deadly cancer throughout the whole population, and to the very heart of their family life. It is no matter of surprise to us to recognise among the foremost opponents of courageous preachers of repentance and rebukers of sin, our old familiar foe, whom we have fought through Europe, which still holds up its hideous head, albeit beginning to be aware that its time is short. Some faint echoes of the blessed word Salvation had found their way, it appears, even into the darkened chambers where crouch the slaves and victims of State-protected vice, and had resuscitated hopes long dead in some poor hearts. A few of the slaves escaped or succeeded in obtaining release, and once more in the light of day, they listened to the glad tidings of salvation. They joined the ranks of their deliverers. Their desertion of their former life represented so much loss to the keepers. Like the sellers of the shrines of Diana, fearing that the hope of their gains was threatened,—not so much by the escape of a few prisoners as by the falling off of a portion of their clientèle,—the officially-recognised traffickers in vice became furious. They have gold in plenty at their disposal, as well as “agents” and “bullies” professionally trained in the service of their abominable traffic, and with these it was easy to win a temporary and dishonorable triumph over God’s messengers of peace and of holiness. Public authorities accustomed to consign women, and girls of tender age, to the officially superintended service of vice, and a police accustomed to see the rights of debauchery recognised and respected by those same authorities as those of an honourable industry, are not likely to prove themselves impartial judges of the value of a revival movement embodying a stern moral and spiritual teaching, nor to show in their conduct any respect for the persons of the teachers or for the sanctity of Law. Such has proved to be the case.

A marked increase in the daring and violence of the bands of roughs was observed, subsequent to a public threat made by the President of the Department of Justice and Police, to withdraw all protection from the meetings, and an expressed desire on his part to expel Salvationists from the Canton, if in his power to do so.

The President of the Department of Justice and Police above-named is M. Marc Héridier, a high functionary and a Councillor of State, elected by the people. As an individual, he is more responsible probably than any other person in Geneva for the violations of the first principles of justice and of law which have been perpetrated there.[5]

“In the sitting of the Grand Council on the 27th January, 1883, in reply to a question asked of the Council of State by the Deputy Odier concerning the tumultuous scenes which had taken place in the public halls, and concerning the duty of the police to suppress these scenes,—

M. Héridier said: “We have been petitioned to call out a company of gendarmerie, sword in hand, to protect these foreigners, and to prevent brawls and rows. I will never consent to take such a step! There are already eight police agents in these places every evening who have a very hard time of it, while these people (the Salvationists) are pleased to amuse themselves by stirring up these scandalous scenes. These agents might be doing more useful work elsewhere, and I am just about to withdraw them. * * * * Do you wish that our military department should enter on a campaign to defend the Salvation Army? (Loud laughter.) Gentlemen, I am not the friend of disorder, and if my view of this matter were only shared by others I would have restored order long ago. M. Odier says that he would have liked to have seen these people sent off on their journey back to England. That is my own feeling also, and for my part I never would have signed the passports of these foreigners. (Loud cheers.)”[6]

On Thursday, 1st February, the office which the Salvationists had taken, 6, Place Longemalle, was attacked, the windows broken, and other damage caused by efforts to force an entrance when the doors were closed. The proprietor of a house of ill-fame, a notorious character in the city, was active in the crowd which blockaded the building, inciting the lowest fellows to violence. The same day Colonel Clibborn and a French officer of the Armée du Salut were stoned through the main street of the city in broad daylight. The life of another officer, Thonger, was seriously imperilled, the police refusing protection. “Their courage and their patience,” writes M. Audeoud, “testified to the sincerity of their faith.” The Geneva Government now judged that the moment for action had arrived, and in this they were certainly right; only they overlooked the fact that it was the authors of the public disturbances whom it was necessary to rebuke, and not the victims. Instead of taking prompt and energetic measures to check the assailants, they issued their famous decree, of the 2nd February, ordering the meetings to be closed. It is important to notice that this measure was denounced as illegal by the leading journal of Geneva, the Journal de Genève, and by a large number of the citizens—jurists, advocates, and authors.

The following is the text of the decree of the Government which was publicly posted on the 2nd February:—“In consequence of representations which have reached the Department of Justice and Police, whence it is understood that religious meetings held by a group of persons calling themselves the Salvation Army and acting under the direction of foreigners not established in the Canton, have been preceded by advertisements of a nature to agitate the population; and seeing that the exercises and operations of the above individuals give rise to energetic protests, and that the public peace is daily troubled in a grave and disquieting manner—Be it decreed: In virtue of Article 9 of the law of 11th March, 1816, on the duties of the administrative police; and under the seal of the Department of Justice and Police, that the exercises of the Salvation Army be temporarily suspended.”

A gentleman of Geneva remarks on this:—“We might well criticise the style and the logic of this singular document; but we limit ourselves to its condemnation as manifestly illegal. The Council of State has undoubtedly gone beyond its powers in the matter. Its mandate is to enforce the execution of existing laws, and not to make new ones. It is bound, also, whenever it adopts any administrative measure, to quote the law on whose authority it does so.” Now the only legislative proposition which the Council of State were able to find, after searching through their law books dating as far back as the first years of the present century, was Article 9 of the Law of March 11, 1816. The Article is as follows:—“They (the lieutenant of police and his staff) are charged with the inspection of shows, dancing saloons, cafés, billiard-rooms, cabarets, wine cellars, and all other places of public gatherings, as well as public-houses and inns. The Council of State has the exclusive right to close these different establishments. There are in this same law, clauses which might have seemed a little more applicable to the circumstances of the present case; such, for instance, as Article 2, which directs the same magistrates to protect the persons of the citizens; Article 5, which enjoins them to maintain order, and free circulation for passengers in the streets; and Article 3, which recommends them to see that the peace of worshippers be not disturbed either inside or outside the churches. But in reading these articles, the Council of State seem to have judged them too antique or too characteristic of an epoch of absolutism in Government to be applicable to the present times. They eagerly, however, availed themselves of the authority conferred on them by Article 9 of this antique law for the shutting up of shows, dancing saloons, cafés, &c., and armed with this authority they immediately ordained the closing of meetings which they themselves call “religious,” held in rooms and halls where dancing, drinking and the playing of theatrical pieces were certainly never carried on! On the strength of this article they ultimately forbade all the “exercises” of the Salvation Army in the Hall of the Reformation, in the Chapel Buis, in private houses, in woods or fields, and generally in every place where they could possibly be held. They might indeed have sought in vain in their “Collection of Laws” for any legal utterance authorizing them to apply such an interdiction to the private houses of citizens and to their places of worship. To find such they would have been obliged to carry their researches a few centuries backward, perhaps to the period, for example, of the Inquisition.”

A petition against the measure for closing the meetings was signed by a large number of citizens, from which I extract the following:—“The undersigned Geneva citizens are profoundly grieved in reading this decree. It affords a dangerous precedent in thus endorsing acts of violence which might easily have been put down, and which were chiefly perpetrated by boys and strangers.”

It is a serious breach of the Constitutional rights of the citizens.

It is in opposition to the principles of our Cantonal and Federal laws which guarantee the free exercise of religion, and the personal liberty of the citizens. Those citizens possess the right to attend any and all public meetings, (and still more, private meetings,) without molestation from persons who may happen to dislike the special ideas, beliefs or practices presented at such meetings.

It is a violation of all the ideas of freedom and of religious toleration enshrined not only in our laws but in all our customs, and of which the people of Geneva are justly proud.

“The State Council would have met with the unanimous approval and support of the citizens in adopting energetic measures to preserve order in the streets; but we deem it disastrous to have attempted to attain this end by suppressing the free expression of opinion, and the right to attend meetings which have presented nothing in any way whatever contrary to public order or good behaviour.[7]

“The decree in question professes to be based upon the law of the 11th of March, 1816. Now this law simply confers upon the State Council the right to order the closing of certain public establishments. It cannot be construed to authorise the suppression of a series of meetings. But even supposing it to be susceptible of such an interpretation, that law was virtually abrogated by the Constitution of 1848, which guarantees individual liberty, and liberty of worship.... The decree is a fatal encouragement to violent disturbances and riotous manifestations in the public streets.... It is a dangerous precedent in interfering with the free exercise of the liberty of assembly.

“Wherefore the undersigned earnestly pray that the State Council will at once withdraw this measure, a measure contrary to the liberal principles which form the basis of Republican Government, and to the constitutional rights of the citizens.—February 3, 1883.”

This petition was, in the space of twenty-four hours, signed by nine hundred citizens of Geneva and of Switzerland, representing all classes of society without exception. Among the signatures are found those of thirty Pastors (almost all of the National Church), eight Professors at the University, twenty-one Judges, Advocates, and Doctors of Law, fourteen Doctors of Medicine, several medical and other students, &c.

In the decree closing the meetings the State Council, as we have seen, instead of clearly defining the extent of the prohibition simply inserted the indefinite words:—“Resolved to suspend temporarily the exercises of the Salvation Army.” Although Miss Booth demanded, on the first occasion on which she was summoned to the police-office that she should be distinctly told what was meant by the word exercises, in order that she and her friends might know what was permitted and what was not, and although she subsequently repeated this demand, no answer has ever been given.

As the inviolability of the private houses of the citizens is guaranteed by Swiss law,[8] this decree (even supposing it to have been legal) could not with any shadow of justice be construed to render illegal private gatherings in private houses to which the members of the Salvation Army might be invited. This was the positive opinion of all those who were consulted on the question. If the word “exercises” could be construed to mean an acceptance of a private invitation to visit friends in their private houses for prayer and religious interchange of thought, then it might with equal justice, include every movement which could be made, such as walking and conversing in the street, or consultation among two or three, no matter where or how.

In the first week of February appeared the “Letter” of Madame de Gasparin, already sufficiently known in England as well as in Switzerland. M. Sautter de Blonay, it seems to me, has so well represented the influence of that publication on the whole controversy that I cannot do better than again quote his words:—“The Salvation Army,” he says, “comes to Paris, the most police-ridden of cities, among a mocking, jesting people, of lax morality. Criticisms become more sharp, and fears arise. But in spite of all, the Army are able to carry on successfully their work in France for several months. Having so far succeeded in France, they very reasonably imagine they can safely come to Switzerland, the most ancient Republic of modern times, who proudly professes herself to be the initiatrice of Republican principles, and a model of liberty to the world. Is it not in Switzerland that those who propound the necessity of the destruction of the whole existing social order are tolerated and protected in their persons and in the meetings, and justly so, so long as they do not by their actions break the law or violate the rights of others? Is it not in Switzerland that all patriotic orations turn upon the theme, ‘Liberty for all opinions?’ The Salvation Army hear this, and believe it. Trusting our outward professions, they imagine they will find again on our soil the freedom of old England, and respect for the persons of all. They arrive, and immediately fall into a veritable ambuscade, as has been said. Insults and threats are showered upon persons who are seen coming to their private meetings, held in closed rooms; and the assailants are not rebuked. In short, they are persecuted, and crushed, and even those who plead their cause as a question of justice do so in terms of contempt for themselves. And this alas! is the moment, Madam, when you choose to come to the help of the persecutors.

“Your letter was written, it has been said, before the persecutions began. Yes, before the issue of the dictatorial police order, but not before the personal outrages. Now these personal outrages, not having been judicially repressed or reproved, led on naturally to the persecution. I know you too well, Madam, not to be aware that these were unfortunate coincidences for which you are not responsible; but I cannot refrain from asking why you did not write much earlier, some months ago, or why you did not write in a different manner? for you cannot deny, and the fact must be grievous to yourself, that your letter contributed, more than any other thing, to impart to M. Héridier the unfortunate courage to act as he has done. You have thus aided the violation, in your own country, of that which you yourself hold most dear, next to the Gospel—religious liberty. You might have written your protest and announced it as about to appear, adding that it should not however see the light until the Salvation Army was placed in possession of all the rights which our laws confer, and that you declined to attack an adversary already beaten. Better still, you might have written twice; first, in order to defend the civil rights of the members of the Salvation Army, and secondly in order to attack its organization; but this ought to have been later, when through your influence, justice would have been done. How noble a part might you have acted! As the defender of justice, you would have been the more powerful in your refutation of error; as the opponent of error, you, more successfully than others, could have insisted on right and justice. It is thus that the Christian Chevalier, whose name you bear, the noble Count de Gasparin would have acted. From the first moment, from the first outrage perpetrated, he would have perceived that the peculiarities of the Salvation Army were a secondary question, and that that which is at stake is the cause of religious liberty in Switzerland, that sacred cause to which he had consecrated his life. You well know, Madam, that he never would have lifted his hand against the vanquished, against young girls, foreigners and defenceless, against Christian brethren who had been misled.... I grieve the more for the inopportuneness of your attack, because it has caused you to play into the hands of our enemies, the enemies of religious liberty.”

A gentleman of Geneva, criticising the action of the Department of Justice and Police in the matter of the closing of the meetings, in which the Department, as we have seen, had fallen back on an old law of 1816, says:—“The magistrates of the early part of this century nevertheless understood that it was their duty to maintain the liberty of those who were regarded as the most dangerous sectaries. It was not granted to them to make the discovery of the astonishing proposition which gains ground in our day, namely, that if there were no victims of outrage, outrages would not exist; and that in consequence it is the victims who are the authors of the mischief and the really guilty persons. They obeyed the law under their hand of 1816, without dreaming of the triumphant application which would be made of it against religious liberty by their successors some sixty years later. Order was maintained by them, and the liberties of a contemptible minority were protected. Our ancient magistrates consulting neither their sympathies nor their antipathies, nor even their sincere convictions concerning what they believed to be for the public good, held it to be a matter of honour and of conscience to fulfil the first duties of their position, that of causing the rights of all, including those of the weakest portion of the community, to be respected. A party Government, on the contrary (such as is at present in power), does not scruple, in order to excite and maintain the zeal of its present supporters, to cultivate irritating questions, and even to create them if necessary. It is ready to gratify the passions of the people on any question where there is a chance of making use of them in their own interests, against persons whose insignificant number makes them in no way dangerous. Herein we find the distinction between a Government which is truly National and a Government by a party.”

To return to the legal validity of the decree of the 2nd February;—not only is there no law upon which it could have been substantially based, but it actually violates in the most open manner the Constitutional Guarantees which lie at the foundation of the political life of the country. Article 2 of the Constitutional Law of the 26th August, 1868, pronounces: “Liberty of worship is guaranteed throughout the whole extent of Swiss territory. All forms of worship have an equal right to the protection of the State.” This law, accepted by the people, is binding not only upon the executive, but on the legislative power itself. The duty of the Council of State was to have enforced respect for it at all costs. The Council of State preferred to violate it, and in doing so has by the same blow struck at the principles of the inviolability of domicile, of freedom of speech, and freedom of public meeting.

The following remarks on the subject appeared in the Journal de Genève of February 3, 1883:—

“We published yesterday a proclamation of the Geneva Government closing the meetings of the Salutists; to-day we receive the text of a proclamation of the Government of Neuchâtel on the same subject. These two proclamations present a great contrast the one to the other. That of Neuchâtel is founded on the text of the Constitution, which guarantees freedom of public meeting and freedom of worship. It reminds the authors of the disturbances, of the law against such outrages, and threatens punishment if they disobey. The Genevese Government, on the contrary, entirely ignores the Constitution. It does not contain a single word of blame for the individuals who for a fortnight past have been disgracing our town, breaking up meetings held in private houses, attacking inoffensive people in the streets, and perpetrating every kind of violence. It reserves its severity for the victims of these acts of violence, for the foreigners or Genevese citizens alike who have been attacked, insulted, hunted, and maltreated by bands of roughs who have remained, and evidently will remain, unchecked and unpunished. The victory which these bands of roughs have obtained over our laws is decisive and complete. The Government whose duty it is to enforce respect for the laws has lowered its flag in the presence of these rioters, and has made itself the executor of their will. Truly we blush for shame in reading this proclamation and in comparing the language of our Genevan Council of State with that of Neuchâtel. Is it possible that on this question in which are involved freedom of speech, and of meeting, individual liberty, the rights of citizens to go where they please, to listen to whom they please, and to be free from attacks in the streets, our Government has nothing to say? It seeks a miserable excuse for the disturbances in the text of an advertisement of the meetings which was previously submitted to its own judgment and the placarding of which it authorised. This advertisement was a very small affair indeed to justify not only the interference of the mob, but an assault by our Government itself on liberty of opinion.... If it presented the character which they now attribute to it, it was in the power of the police to have interfered, and everyone would have been satisfied with its decision. But six weeks have passed since it appeared, and if it was so dangerous as it is now asserted for the public peace, it is rather late to condemn it only to-day. All that has occurred confirms our suspicions on the more than equivocal part which the police have played since the commencement of these events, and proves almost to a certainty its complicity with the rioters. If from the first the police had seriously and sincerely wished to hinder the disturbances, they had abundant power to do so. They might then have brought into play Article 9 of the law of March 11th, 1816, but instead of this they tolerated and encouraged the rioters with the motive of reaching the end which M. Héridier confessed in the Grand Council he had in view, namely, of driving out of our midst people whose religion does not please him. Doubtless their religion does not please; but what merit would there be in tolerating it if it entirely pleased us? and what motive would there have been for inscribing this guarantee in our Constitution if it were only meant to be applied to cases in which it would be manifestly useless? The game is played! but now we must see that we do not any longer deceive foreigners, who, in the faith of our Constitution, may imagine that Geneva is a country of religious liberty. It will be necessary to change the text of the articles of the Constitution in which this mention of our rights is found. It must in future run thus:—‘Freedom of meeting is guaranteed; nevertheless, persons who know how to persevere in making sufficient noise, coupled with abuse and personal assaults, shall always be able to obtain from the Government the closing by the Police of any meeting whatsoever, even in a private house, which happens to displease them.’ Such is the régime which the manifesto of the Geneva Government has inaugurated. There is not much in it to make one proud of one’s country. It is the true arbitraire, and the most wretched form of it, namely, that which is born of weakness and cowardice.”





On the 8th February, after having spent some time quietly at the house of M. Lenoir in the neighbourhood of Geneva, Miss Booth was summoned to the Police Court and subjected to a lengthy cross-examination. Numberless questions were asked of her, and afterward of Miss Charlesworth, which were of a personal and utterly unjustifiable nature, some of them being of a significance better understood perhaps by men of the character of their questioners than they could be by refined Christian ladies. The following day Miss Booth was again called before the Police, and was then suddenly requested to produce the account books of the Salvation Army in Switzerland. Little imagining that this was the point upon which was to be based her illegal expulsion from Geneva, Miss Booth frankly and unsuspectingly replied: “It is impossible for me to do so, as I am not the treasurer, and my secretary who has the books is now absent from Geneva. But,” she added, “you shall have them as soon as she returns.”

It was now that the monstrous charge was made against Miss Booth of having broken a cantonal law which has no existence, but which was improvised by the Chief of the Department of Justice and Police in order to afford an excuse for the complete suppression of the Salvation Army in Geneva. It is with shame and grief that the chronicler of these events feels obliged to publish the plain fact that M. Héridier falsified a cantonal law of Geneva, apparently deliberately, since the falsification was repeated at a later date as we shall presently see, in order to get rid of this person whose Christian courage and unflinching attacks on the sins of the day appear to have excited his anger or his fears. In the absence of recorded facts we are left to imagine what may have passed in the minds of some of the authorities of Geneva during those few days between the closing of the meetings and the accusation and expulsion of Miss Booth. Readers of this story will naturally ask—“What had occurred in the interval?” They have an answer from the Federal Council itself, which when citing these circumstances in the month of July following, declares that Miss Booth had during that period gone into retirement, and that she had herself advised other officers of the Army to abstain from any act which might seem like a contravention of the decree forbidding the meetings. Much, however, had evidently occurred in the hearts and consciences of certain persons at Geneva. It is no doubt convenient to throw off the guilt of such miserable transactions as we are now obliged to criticize upon the ignorant and misguided mob. But the act which is now under consideration was not that of the people. It appears to have been conceived in the private chamber of some unhappy being whose own life and character may have been presented to himself in a new light by the severe teaching of the Salvationists, and who, lacking the courage to face the truths announced by them, took the ill-starred resolution to get rid of them by whatever means.

M. Héridier having found it necessary to make diligent search for some charge against Miss Booth, appears to have ransacked the Penal code and the police regulations of the city for this purpose. He finds Article 27 of the police regulations concerning the discipline to be applied to foreigners, which runs thus: “If subsequent to the granting of a permission to reside in the canton, the Department of Justice and Police learns that there has been anything which could have been laid to the charge of the foreigner (to whom the permission was given) in the matter of facts which, had they been previously known, would have caused him to refuse that permission, the said permission may be withdrawn.” M. Héridier recollects to have heard that collections of money had been publicly made at the close of Salvationist meetings, and he lays his hand on the cantonal law of March 4, 1879, concerning collections made “from house to house.” This appears susceptible of being made to serve the purpose in view. The title of the law is perhaps a little embarrassing; it is this: “Règlements de la Police sur les collectes à domicile.” Nevertheless he makes use of it.

M. Héridier then summons Miss Booth to appear at the police office. She is charged with having broken a law which has no existence, and is expelled from the canton. A double charge was now made against her, which was brought up in the replies to her two appeals; not only had she, according to M. Héridier, infringed the regulation concerning the collection of money, but she had refused, they said, to show her accounts when asked to do so. The demand to show her accounts was in itself an illegal one, and therefore had she refused distinctly to comply with it, she would not have been guilty of any illegal act. At the time, Miss Booth, probably not knowing the text of the regulation cited against her, supposed that her questioners were acting legally in demanding to see the account books. She therefore, as we have seen, offered to satisfy them in that respect as soon as she received the books. In order to be doubly sure of these circumstances, I wrote to Miss Booth early in July, and asked her the simple question, “Did you, or did you not refuse to show your accounts?” The circumstances which immediately prompted me thus to write to her was an interview which I had on the 25th of July, with the Chancellor of the Confederation in the Federal Palace at Berne. I had called to ask if he would oblige me by letting me have a copy of the printed reply of the Federal Council to Miss Booth’s appeal, as our Ambassador at Berne informed me that he had sent his copy to the Foreign Office in London. In the course of my conversation with the Chancellor I mentioned the matter of the accounts. He then stated abruptly that Miss Booth had positively refused when legally required to do so, to submit her accounts to the Genevese Department of Justice and Police. Knowing to the contrary, I replied: “Pardon me, sir, she was willing to show them, but time was not given her to do so.” The Chancellor with some indignation then asked: “Have you come here to dispute with me on a matter of fact?” That not being the object of my visit, I retired, and having written to Miss Booth I received the following from her:—“On the 8th and 9th of February I was summoned to the Hotel de Ville to be cross-examined. Among many other questions I was asked to produce on the spot the accounts of all money received and spent in Geneva, or to show them at the house where I was staying. I told them it was impossible for me to show them then and there, as the friend who kept them was absent from Geneva and had the books with her. I added that for myself I had nothing to do with the keeping or the immediate expenditure of the money, neither could I answer their questions as to the amount received by the collectors, as I did not know what it was. My examiner said, ‘Very well, Mdlle., you refuse then to show your accounts;’ and he was about to write that down. ‘No,’ I replied, ‘I do not refuse to show the accounts, but they are not in my hands; I ask time to recall my secretary, when you can see them.’ It was with the utmost difficulty that I prevented him from writing down that I had definitely refused to show the accounts, which he appears to have done notwithstanding. It is our rule to publish our accounts, audited by some one outside the Army, annually. But in this case of Geneva I made an exception and told my examiner that they would be published at the end of the first three months, and then all the world could see them. On the 12th I was cross-examined again, M. Lenoir being present. Being again asked for the accounts, I told them that the day previously, the 11th, they had expelled Miss Charlesworth, and that my secretary was still absent. Miss Charlesworth had the petty cash-book and had taken it with her. M. Lenoir, banker, M. Pictet, lawyer, who are friends of justice, bitterly lamented this action which their native country had taken. They, together with M. Audeoud, also a lawyer, and M. Naville, all assured me that such a thing had never been done before, that the police authorities had no legal right at all to ask me such a question, and that I was not in any way bound to answer them. That same day, the 12th, I was expelled, and left Geneva before six o’clock that night.

(Signed)      “Catherine Booth.”





In consequence of the publication in the Government organ, the Genevois, of a number of anonymous letters, some of which were of a shameful and slanderous character, and one of which contained the statement that the Salvation Army were robbing the country and had already forwarded enormous sums of money to London, the officers had publicly announced that they would publish their balance-sheet of receipts and expenditure at Geneva, at the end of the quarter instead of at the end of the year, as was their usual custom. Every collection had been carefully registered in their books.[9] It was further stated by Miss Booth when she was questioned, that all the accounts of the Army were under the inspection of a well-known firm of public accountants in London, under whose signature they were published. The conduct of the Geneva authorities in demanding to have the account books of the Army submitted to their scrutiny is, besides being illegal as judged by their own laws, a breach of the “Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Establishment of 1855” between Switzerland and England. Article 3 of that Treaty runs thus:—

“The dwellings and warehouses of the citizens or subjects of either of the two contracting parties, in the territories of the other, and all premises appertaining thereto, destined for purposes of residence or commence, shall be respected. No search or examination of such dwellings and premises, and no examination or inspection of the books, papers, or accounts of the respective citizens and subjects shall be arbitrarily made; but such measures shall be executed only in conformity with the legal sentence, warrant, or order in writing of some Tribunal or Magistrate having competent constitutional or legal jurisdiction.”

I could multiply testimonies to the illegality of these proceedings, but will only cite one more, that of a Swiss lawyer, given in reply to a question which I asked him in writing:—“The Geneva Government,” he says, “and subsequently the Federal Government, have cited against Miss Booth a Cantonal regulation of the 4th March, 1879, upon public collections of money. Now no such regulation exists in the Canton of Geneva; for the regulation of the 4th March, 1879, is entitled, ‘A regulation concerning house to house collections of money,’ and contains no article whatsoever on the subject of collections made in either private or public meetings, which are placed on a footing of complete liberty. There is no Genevese regulation which bears the title of ‘Regulation concerning public collections;’ consequently we are driven to the conclusion that this title was invented for the necessity of the case in hand.”

In regard to the collections of money, it is to be noted that the collections in Geneva had been made for several weeks previously to the 29th January, at which date the Department of Justice and Police had given Miss Booth an official permission to reside in the Canton, and that those collections had been made in public, under the eyes of the police, during all those weeks previous to the illegal order to stop the meetings. No question whatever as to their legality was raised at the moment when Miss Booth received in exchange for her passport the permission to reside in the Canton.

On the 11th of February, Miss Charlesworth was expelled from the Canton. The grounds of her expulsion and the circumstances connected with it will be given later. At half-past twelve on the following day (the 12th) Miss Booth received the warrant of expulsion, commanding her to leave the Canton before 6 o’clock the same day upon pain of imprisonment. The officer who delivered to her the warrant, turned back after having left the door, to impress upon her the fact that if she did not leave before 6 o’clock she would incur the penalty of imprisonment. It is worthy of remark that common felons are allowed twenty-four hours’ notice of expulsion, whereas this lady was only given five and a-half hours’ notice.

I have now passed in review the three illegal or immoral acts of which the authorities at Geneva were guilty since the entrance of the Salvation Army into their city, namely:—1. The closing of the meetings. 2. The falsification of the police regulation concerning collections of money. 3. The expulsion of the officers.

Those who took part in these events, Swiss and English alike, are anxious that the public should, however, clearly understand that these illegal acts were those of a mere handful of men openly at war with all religion, and that such a course of conduct is as repugnant to the minds of all the true Swiss citizens as they can be to our own countrymen. Many indignant protests have been made against these measures both in the Swiss Press and in numerous pamphlets published in Switzerland, of which my space allows only meagre extracts.

I give the account of Miss Charlesworth’s arrest and expulsion in her own words:—

“On Saturday, the 10th February, I was summoned to appear at the Police Court. M. Lenoir, a gentleman of Geneva, accompanied me, and asked permission to go with me before the officials who had instructions to cross-examine me. I wished to have a friend present, being a minor, and not knowing the language perfectly. We waited half-an-hour while Mr. Cuenod[10] tried to induce M. Héridier to allow M. Lenoir to go with me. M. Héridier persisted in refusing, and I was conducted into a little office in the remote part of the building. Here I was kept from 3.30 till 7.30, being questioned sometimes by three, and sometimes by five officials. After asking my age, birthplace, nationality, &c., they began to speak on personal subjects, about which I know they had no right to ask me. They asked me whether, being a minor, I had my father’s permission to be in Geneva with Miss Booth. I answered that I had, and that Miss Booth had letters in her possession to prove it. Nevertheless, the chief charge subsequently adduced for my expulsion was that I produced no authorization from my parents. I was asked how I lived, whether we received much money from the Army for our board, what sort of food we had, &c. I answered that I received nothing from the Army. I was asked if I had a passport and a permission to reside. I answered that my passport was deposited at the Town Hall in exchange for my permit of residence. The inspector, who had been told I had no papers, was enraged at this, and did not try to conceal or restrain his passion. He sent for another official who found my passport and proved my papers to be all right. I was asked many questions about the meeting I had attended at Cologny. They said I had done so contrary to the decree. I answered that I was invited by letter, and I went to the meeting as a guest, and on being asked, I spoke and prayed. Others also spoke who had nothing to do with the Army. The police detectives went to this private meeting; they slipped in after it had begun, and not having been asked at the door whether they were invited guests, they reported it to be a public meeting. I protested that being only guests we could not be responsible for the door-keeping, and that we knew none of those invited. They made a number of charges against us with respect to this meeting, which I contradicted. I was asked how I dared to wear my uniform in a meeting after having been told of the law forbidding religious dresses. I answered that the law only specified that religious costumes were not to be worn in the public highway, and that it could not be applied to private houses or a private gathering in the kitchen of a private house. Moreover, I wore no uniform, but an ordinary dress.... I was at last allowed to leave the office where I had spent four hours. We were told to appear the next morning, but on leaving we recollected it would be Sunday, and we wrote a letter saying we could not conscientiously go on that day.[11] At half-past twelve on Sunday I received an official warrant, which informed me that I must be out of the Canton in five hours.... I was sent away alone; for they had taken care to hurry off the French and German officers without giving them time to communicate with their comrades. The warrant stated that I was expelled for (1) having disobeyed the proclamation of the Cantonal Council suspending temporarily the exercises of the Salvation Army; (2) for having produced no authorisation from my parents giving me leave to reside in Geneva, and (3) for having refused to present myself on the Sunday.”

Let us suppose this case reversed, and imagine a young Swiss lady of seventeen suddenly called up before the police authorities in London, no other lady, no friend, no witness, allowed to be present, taken to Scotland Yard, and into a small room at the remote end of the building, cross-questioned alone by five men in a foreign language (her only crime being that she had accepted an invitation to a prayer meeting in a private house), and expelled on a Sunday within five hours’ notice. It is difficult to imagine such a possibility.

During the first cross-examination, Miss Charlesworth had said that Miss Booth had in her possession letters from her father authorising her to reside in Geneva, but she was not asked to produce these letters then or at any subsequent time. On the Sunday, however, she was suddenly and summarily expelled, one of the grounds of her expulsion being that she had never shown these letters. She was sent off (as has been said) alone, the authorities having taken care a few days previously to expel the officers of the Salvation Army who had been her companions, and in some sort her protectors. She was thus also forcibly separated from Miss Booth, her constituted guardian, and from all her other companions, and this in spite of her own earnest protests. No words of mine surely are required to increase the feeling on the one hand of pity and on the other of indignation which must arise in the minds of English readers on perusing this narrative. One cannot fail, also, to be struck with the cowardice (for it is impossible to give it a gentler name), manifested by the authorities in availing themselves of the moment when Mr. Clibborn, the business head of the Salvation Army work, was absent at Berne, where he had gone to claim the protection of the Federal Council on their behalf, in order to attack these gentle and unoffending girls. When Miss Charlesworth was called up the second time, Miss Booth wrote a letter of remonstrance, saying she did not think she ought to be submitted to a second cross-examination. The officials, however, overcame Miss Booth’s objection by insisting that M. Héridier himself wished to see her personally. She did not see M. Héridier, but only a number of his subordinates.

The following is the letter referred to by Miss Charlesworth when questioned as to whether she had her father’s permission to reside abroad. Miss Booth received it from the Rev. S. Charlesworth in reply to one from herself asking if he would permit his daughter to stay in Geneva during her projected visit to England:—

“January 31, 1883.





“I will leave entirely to your judgment and the convenience of your arrangements whether my child remains in Geneva or at Paris during your absence. Let her be where she will be most helpful to you and most useful in the Lord’s service. If you intend to return to Geneva, her remaining there will save both the fatigue and the expense of a long double journey.

(Signed)      “Samuel Charlesworth.”





The following letter, written by Mr. Charlesworth, seventeen days later to the British Ambassador at Berne, further confirms the fact that Miss Charlesworth was in Switzerland with her father’s consent. (She never took the character in Switzerland of an officer in the Salvation Army; but, in accordance with her father’s wish, accompanied and aided Miss Booth as a friend.)

“Clapham Common, London, 17th February, 1883.





“Sir,—At the request of Miss Booth and of my daughter, Maud Elizabeth Charlesworth, I write to mention to your Excellency, that my daughter has accompanied Miss Booth to Switzerland with my full concurrence. She will be 18 years of age next September.

“I am anxious to have it understood that my daughter is not officially connected with the Salvation Army, but is only with Miss Booth as a young friend and visitor, taking much interest in the work carried on amongst the poor in England and on the Continent.

“I have the honour to be your Excellency’s very obedient servant,

(Signed)      “Samuel Charlesworth.”





Even had her father’s authorisation been wanting, neither this nor the fact of her age afforded just grounds for Miss Charlesworth’s expulsion, as the Department of Police had given her the permit of residence with a full knowledge of her age and without asking her to produce her father’s authorisation. It is certain there are many young persons in Switzerland of both sexes who live and travel in the country without ever being asked to produce an authorisation from their parents.

The Geneva correspondent of the Times (February 19, 1883) published a letter from Miss Charlesworth on the subject of her appearance before the police, in a paragraph headed “A Lamb among Wolves.” This letter was written by Miss Charlesworth to a private friend in England, and was never intended by her for publication. She was much surprised to see it in the Times. She had handed it to some one who asked her in a friendly manner for some details, saying, “You can gather something from this.” No serious blame, however, in regard to this mistake, need be imputed to the Geneva correspondent of the Times, who had generally represented in their true light the injustices committed by the Genevan authorities at that time. This letter, having once become public, may naturally take its place in the present narrative. The Times correspondent prefaces it with the remark:—“Miss Charlesworth’s artless narrative is both interesting in itself and valuable for the vivid light which it throws on the ways of Genevan justice—to foreigners. According to the Journal de Genève, M. Héridier, Councillor of State charged with the Department of Justice and Police, was present at Miss Booth’s and Miss Charlesworth’s examinations, but behind a curtain.”

“‘On Saturday afternoon,’ says Miss Charlesworth (who, it may be well to mention, is only seventeen years old), ‘a man came to the house of M. Lenoir, where we were staying, and said that Maud Charlesworth, aide-de-camp to Miss Booth, was to go at once and see the Chief of Police at the Hôtel de Ville. I went at once, taking M. Lenoir with me, as I did not like to go alone. When we arrived, M. Lenoir sent in to ask the Chief of the Police, M. Héridier, if he might be allowed to accompany me. We waited half-an-hour, and then the answer was that I must go alone. So there was nothing else for it, and I had to follow a savage-looking magistrate up stairs into a small and very hot office, where I was asked to sit down. I suppose they thought that this exceedingly cross-looking officer was not enough to question me, for two others, with equally unsaved-looking faces, came in to help him. I had been with Katie (Miss Booth) both the times when she had to appear before the police, so I was quite prepared for the sort of questions they were going to ask me. The last thing Katie said to me was, “Do not sign anything,” and I answered that I would sooner let my right hand be cut off; and when I got into that little room I made up my mind that when they came to the end and asked me to sign I would refuse unless they would allow M. Lenoir to come up and read the paper through.’

“‘Well, they began and asked me about the private meeting at which I had been present. They said it was a public meeting, because three detectives had got in without being asked at the door for their cards of invitation. I denied the false statement, and made them write down my answer plainly. The point on which I laid the most stress was that we, the four Salvationists, had been invited to a private meeting in a private house, to which others (strangers to us) had also been invited; that we spoke, prayed, and sang, as did others who did not belong to the Salvation Army, and that if people who were not invited made their way in it was not our fault; we were only guests. Then they asked me how I dared to wear my uniform at the meeting when I had been told of the law forbidding the wearing of a religious dress. Now, I know this law by heart. It says that no one is to wear a religious dress on the public highway. My answer was that I did not think the words “public highway” could apply to the kitchen of a cottage in which a private meeting was held. I must here tell you that my questioners, or rather persecutors (of whom most of the time there were five) were very unsaved and all possessed very quick tempers. Their object was evidently to frighten me so as to make me answer unwisely, and catch me in my speech. But they were disappointed, for they had never had to do with a Salvationist before, and could not make out why I was so calm and answered so clearly. They were also disappointed to find that I understood their language, and no matter how fast they read I was always ready with an answer. Every now and then one or another went into a passion. But the worst was to come.

“‘Have you got a passport or “leave to stay” in Geneva;’ asked one of the crossest of the examiners (with whom I was now quite alone); and I could see by his manner that he thought that I had not got my papers. I answered that I had my leave to stay; and that my passport was in the hands of the police. You should have seen the rage he got into. He rose, threw down his chair, stamped out of the room, shouted for some under officer, and asked the man what he meant by having said that I was not provided with a passport. This man also lost his temper, went off to look for the passport, and in a few minutes returned and saw I was quite right, that they had my passport and I my ‘leave to stay.’ The inspector then flew into a greater rage than before, and scolded the man who had misled him. When he was more composed he continued. But now he came to personal questions, which I told him he had no right to ask, and I inquired what law authorised him to ask them. He said that was not his affair; he had been told to ask these questions, and I must answer. He asked me if I had my father’s leave to remain at Geneva, and when I said “Yes,” he wanted letters to prove it. I asked him how he dared to doubt my word, and told him to write down that Miss Booth had letters from my father authorising me to stay. A little later he said that I had prayed in a private meeting according to the form of the Salvation Army. I insisted that the Salvation Army had no form of prayer, and asked him in what way their prayers differed from other prayers. He said they differed very much, but he could not tell me how; he repeated that we had a form of prayer, and began to storm and rave so loudly that an inspector ran in from the next room, saying, “Gently, gently, there is somebody outside.” ... At last, after a great deal more questioning my paper was finished. I knew all my answers were true, and that there was no harm in putting my name to it; but then I remembered my promise to Katie, so I refused, unless I might go down and fetch M. Lenoir, and I said I would not sign the paper until he had read it. Of course they raved at me, but it had no effect; so they went for M. Lenoir, but unfortunately he had gone away, as they came back in triumph to tell me. I still refused to sign, and said I would not sign until Captain Bouillat (a member of the Salvation Army) had read it through. They were angry, and tried to frighten me, all talking as fast as they could at the same time. Then they said they would read the paper all through again, which they did three times; but nothing could move me. I said I would go with Zitzer and fetch Bouillat. They answered that I might go, but not with Zitzer (a Salvationist, who was waiting to be examined), but I said I could not think of such a thing—that it would be very improper for a young lady to walk through the streets after dark, especially as I knew there was a plot on foot to do us harm.’ In the end two gendarmes were sent for Bouillat; I and Zitzer waiting meanwhile in the little hot office.

“‘All at once it struck me that we would have a prayer meeting. “Zitzer,” I said, “we will pray. Let us go down on our knees and pray for these people, for if ever we wanted the Lord with us, it is now.” So down we went, and prayed out loud for about ten minutes, and it did us good. The inspector was much surprised; he cleared his throat, grunted, and finally got up and went to the door of the outer office. Then four of the men came back. I said to Zitzer that we would tell the correspondent of the Times, and that I wondered what the English would think of the way in which their countrywomen were being treated. This was overheard, and seemed to make an impression, for two men came and said I was quite free to go if I liked, or if they could fetch me anything they would do so. I wanted to fetch Bouillat, but when I found that I should either have to go alone or walk between two policemen I preferred to wait. At length Bouillat came, and on his recommendation I signed the deposition.

“‘The great fun was that all these cross magistrates and inspectors were kept from their dinners. So were we; but, as I told them, that was a very secondary consideration to us. We left that office at half-past seven, singing, “Glory to His Name.” I had been there four hours. The whole town knew it. A Swiss lawyer at once took all that had passed down in French, because he was so indignant.

“‘On Sunday I received a paper which told me that before 6 o’clock I was to be out of the Canton, because, first, I had broken the law by speaking in a public meeting (lie No. 1); secondly, because I had nothing to show that my parents consented to my being with Miss Booth (lie No. 2); thirdly, because that morning I had not appeared when sent for by the police. (We sent a letter to say that we could not go on Sunday.)

“‘Before the man who brought this letter went away I made him tell me who else was expelled, and I found that Bouillat, Zitzer, and Emile (all foreigners) had shared the same fate. We sent for them to come up that we might arrange where to go, but they did not come, and we found that they had been fetched out of their room, put into a cab with a policeman, and driven away without a moment’s notice. So these three are gone, I know not whither, and Miss Booth sent a Swiss lass with me, as, of course, I could not go alone.’”





Some of the Geneva journals stated that on the Sunday on which Miss Charlesworth was expelled, several—probably a majority—of the Genevan Government had gone to the country for the day, or were otherwise absent. There is some ground for believing that there are persons in that Government who from the first have disapproved of the harsh and unlawful measures for which M. Héridier had made them responsible by these expulsions. The Journal de Genève, after an ironical notice of the rapid interrogations and sudden expulsion at the same moment of the other officers of the Salvation Army—German and French—and of M. Héridier’s secret attendance at all these examinations “behind a curtain, after the manner of all grand inquisitors,” adds: “The public interest was lately awakened in the matter of a Russian prince who was expelled our country. To-day it is the case of two young foreign girls, of honourable character, whose only crime is that they have held religious services of a rather eccentric nature. They have complied with every police rule, and so far from attempting to break the Cantonal decree, they have requested to be more definitely instructed concerning the actions they were to avoid. No answer is given to them, and they are expelled from our HOSPITABLE Genevese soil at six hours’ notice! The Genevois (the Government organ) congratulates the Council of State on its ‘energy.’ It has ‘saved the country; Vive Dieu!’ And what courage did it not require to accomplish such a coup!! We find all this contemptibly ridiculous, shameful, and opposed to all our habits and traditions. For never have foreigners—young girls, almost children one may say—been treated in such a manner among us—in the way in which sharpers and swindlers and women of bad character are treated! By whom are we governed? Into whose hands have we fallen? And what new experiences of madness and folly shall we be called upon to take part in?”

Another journal wrote:—

“When M. Héridier has a motive for attacking our modern liberties he falls back upon a law or regulation of 1816. His political creed goes no further back than that date. Like the ultra-Royalists of the Restoration he ignores all that succeeded the regime of the Constitution of 1814. We do not, however, believe that even in 1816 the Government of our Seigneurs, the Syndics, would have dared to proclaim the principle that the violence of the one party is a justification for the suppression of the rights of the other. And we should like to ask whether the majority of the Council of State who follow M. Héridier perfectly understand that in suspending the meetings of the Salvation Army and expelling its leaders they did not attack only a few foreigners who were here without protection in the midst of us, but that they attacked at the same time the right which every citizen has of using his faculties and liberties as he pleases within the limits of the laws. According to the system now inaugurated the employment of this right is absolutely at the mercy of those who may be displeased by the use made of it at any given time.”

The following letter, addressed to citizens of Geneva by a Swiss gentleman residing in London, indicates some of the secret springs of action whence the unjust expulsions and other events just recorded took their rise:—

“In opening the Times of this morning, my attention was directed to the correspondence from Geneva, followed by a telegram, which opened my eyes in a painful manner. For the first time in my life I felt ashamed of being a Swiss. I said to myself, If my people are autonomous, if every man can make his opinion felt, how can such an infamy be perpetrated? Is it possible that two ladies have been banished from your midst? And why? Have they broken any law? I will speak boldly. It is not for this that you have driven them out ignominiously. I can believe many things, but not this. You have driven them out, or permitted them to be driven out, which comes to the same thing, because you felt impelled to get rid of them, and because you dared not burn them, as would have been done in the old times. You have driven them out because you felt that they have had more real power, more noble virility than all of you put together; because you could not drive them away by ridicule and mockery, that weapon which you have hitherto considered all-powerful, nor even by brutal violence. I picture to myself these young girls leaving all—father, mother, family, country—in order to go forth into the wide world. And for what? Was it in order to make a little money? I cannot understand how people calling themselves men dare to insult them by such an insinuation, which would be ridiculous if it were not so basely cruel. Was it their object to make a noise in the world? Was it notoriety, or the desire of praise, or to have some adventures to record when they returned home? No, you know perfectly well it was not so. Your conscience tells you it was not so. These girls’ souls were filled with one single thought, with one immense desire, which communicated to them an unquenchable zeal, a courage which nothing on earth can shake, a dignity which you may endeavour in vain to lower. What they desired with their whole souls was and is the eternal salvation of their persecutors. It was for you, citizens of Geneva, when you yourselves were wholly indifferent about it, that they sacrificed themselves from day to day, for you who have heaped upon them ridicule which they have borne without complaint, and calumny and insults of such a nature as it seems it has been the lot of the Genevese only to invent. And it was not in order to gain you for the Salvation Army that they entreated you to have pity on yourselves. You know well that they have fought with the energy of despair, that they are ready even at this moment to give their lives, because the one end of all their efforts and sufferings and prayers is to save you from eternal ruin, you who wish to root them out not only from Geneva, but out of the world of the living. You say you do not believe in eternal ruin. But if it were even proved that there is no such thing as a future punishment, would this be a reason for reversing the Christian rule which you cannot but admire, and for saying, ‘Hate your friends, curse them who bless you, do evil to them who love you, persecute and despitefully use those who pray for you?’ May there not be in this fury which possesses you a sign that you are not quite so sure about your own beliefs, and that this makes you dislike those who come to trouble your mental security, to awaken certain doubts, and to cause some still living chords in your deadened consciences to vibrate? You say you do not believe in a Saviour; but is this any reason why you should furiously persecute those who come to announce to you that perhaps there is still a Saviour ready to receive even you? Is it not true that you feel instinctively that the Saviour of whom you speak wishes to deliver you from the power of sin, and that in your secret hearts you do not wish to give up sin. You would be very glad to escape eternal ruin if there is such a lot in store for you, but none the less do you desire to escape from the dreadful necessity of giving up the enjoyment of vice, and consequently you are furious with those who come to say to you ‘make your choice.’ But perhaps you will reply ‘No, it is not that; what we reject is not the Gospel, it is the Salvation Army and its eccentricities.’ You speak falsely. If certain women had brought to you heaps of gold, of treasures, not invisible, but palpable and tangible, in good ringing metal, would you take offence at the colour or the shape of their dresses? Would you not be ready to listen to their harangues, their prayers, their singing, to excuse their English accent, and to bear with all imaginable eccentricities in order to have your share of that treasure? But here are handmaidens of the Lord who offer you neither silver nor gold, which they neither possess nor wish to give, but who hold out to you that which they have to give, the glad tidings of Salvation. This they offer you gratuitously, with joy, with love, with pity, and what have you done in return? You have endeavoured to crush them; you have expelled them ignominiously. Yet you have succeeded only in bringing shame upon yourselves. You have shown to the world that Switzerland, the cradle of modern freedom, may very soon become its grave.

“But no! a thousand times no! It is not too late. Post tenebras lux.[12] Citizens of Switzerland, if you have any drop of Swiss blood left in your veins, if you still have in you the hearts of men, wake up and act!”





On Miss Booth’s arrival very late on the 12th February at Lausanne, she went with two other ladies to an hotel, which out of consideration for the proprietors I shall not name. Having in a state of extreme exhaustion mounted the stairs to the fourth story, the porter who was carrying their luggage was called to from below by the proprietor through the communicator, when Miss Booth and her companions heard the following words: “Send those people down at once.” The porter asked why, and remonstrated. The answer was, “They are Salvationists; you must send them down at once, we will not have them here.” Therefore, Miss Booth and her companions, almost fainting from suffering and exhaustion, were expelled the hotel. They were, however, hospitably received at the Hotel des Trois Suisses, whose proprietor has never allowed blind popular prejudice to prevent him from showing kind hospitality all along to the Salvationists.

In a letter to her friends on these events, Miss Booth said: “Everybody considered that the decree forbidding the ‘exercises of the Army’ referred to public meetings, and as every Swiss person’s house is inviolable according to the law, our officers accepted private invitations to take part in private prayer meetings called by Swiss citizens. But here also persecution followed us. Detectives dogged our every step. Spies watched our every movement. On Thursday evening I was suddenly called up by the police. My comrade, Miss Charlesworth, was sent for a day later and questioned for four hours by a number of men—sometimes three and sometimes five taking part in the cross-examination. A gentleman of Geneva who has proved a true friend from the first, protested that it was neither seemly, humane, nor just, that a young lady of seventeen, a subject of another nation, and not possessing a perfect knowledge of the language, should be subjected to such a cross-examination without the presence of a witness or anyone to represent her father.

“Colonel Clibborn had gone to Berne to see the President of the Republic and the British Ambassador, and to claim protection.

“At one o’clock on Sunday an official appeared with a document expelling Miss Charlesworth. Captains Zitzer and Bouillot, and Lieutenant Emile were suddenly taken up by the police and hurried off to the frontier....

“Next day I was expelled. On the way out of the town some fifty of our brave soldiers who had learned the fact met us on the road. Never shall I forget the scene! There were many tears and prayers. But I told them it was but the old story—the devil defeating himself, and that all his efforts and all the power of hell combined could not stop the work; that God had begun to work; that this fire would only purify and strengthen; that justice and right would triumph and we should return. Meanwhile I charged them to carry out the war boldly as true Swiss soldiers. Then all broke out into a ringing hymn, and sang until their faces shone again.”

Miss Charlesworth, who had gone to Coppet, joined her friend again at Lausanne.





CHAPTER III.





Leaving the banished Salvationists for a moment, I go back in my narrative in order to bring before the reader some slight picture, imperfect as it must be, of the great spiritual work which was accomplished without intermission in Geneva during the heat of the persecution. This might be illustrated by hundreds of personal testimonies and incidents, from among which I can only select a few.

In reply to a request which I made to Colonel Clibborn to give me some information concerning the motives which led him and his companions to go to Geneva, and concerning the beginning of the work there, he wrote to me as follows:—

“You say you have all the newspapers, secular and religious, published in the early part of the year, and you have therefore sufficient record of the sad and dark side of the history—the triumph of the powers of darkness. I shall, therefore, as you ask, try to give you some slight details of the brighter side, showing the glorious operation of the spirit of God and the triumphs of the Kingdom of Light. I feel sure that the facts which I state will be found to be in harmony with the information you have received from your numerous acquaintances in Switzerland during your visit this summer. You ask how we entered the country.

“A Swiss citizen of note said to me not long ago in conversation:—

“‘When the Army first came to Switzerland I thought it had made a mistake, and that we did not need it; but as I have watched late events my opinion has entirely changed. I now believe the Army was sent of God, and at the chosen time. It was needed not only in order to reach the masses, but to show us the actual state of our country. We could not have believed that such an awful state of godlessness and cruel wickedness existed under the surface, and that infidelity and vice had made such frightful progress. But above all has been the terrible revelation of the real state of our so-called Christianity. Yes, our eyes have been opened, and it is high time. Many of us are humbled in the dust, acknowledging the hand of God in the awakening sent to us. But also many refuse to do so and are hardening their hearts. There is no doubt the Army has already wrought a great and needed revolution in the minds of a great mass of Christians with reference to vital aggressive religion.’

“Had this gentleman known all the circumstances which combined to direct the march of the Army to Geneva he would have found further confirmation of his opinion.

“Desiring to extend its work into the Provinces of France the Armée du Salut had searched successively three Roman Catholic towns for a hall, without succeeding in finding any that was suitable. Meanwhile warm and pressing invitations had come from various parts of Switzerland. The following is an extract from one of them which appeared in the French organ of the Salvation Army in October of 1882:—‘I wish to tell you that your paper En Avant makes me see more and more clearly how much Christians need to come out of their state of langour in order to become true soldiers, and to fight as you do. Believe me that I indeed make it a subject of prayer before the Lord. My friends join me in assuring you of our fullest sympathy with your great and glorious work; we unite in asking the best blessings of God upon this war which you have undertaken. Our greatest wish is to see you soon cross our frontier. God grant that we may ere long clasp hands!’”

On Monday, the 4th December, Colonel Clibborn came to Switzerland to “view the land,” as the Army phrase it, intending to spend a week in reconnoitring Geneva and two other towns, hold several explanatory meetings, and, if possible, hire and commence the fitting up of a hall. On the day after his arrival he received a message, saying that several pastors wished him to meet them. They seemed uneasy at the arrival of the Army, and asked that it should not come to Geneva, or at any rate that it should postpone its arrival for some months, as they intended after the approaching fête to have several special meetings weekly, such as had just been held by Pastor Theodore Monod with much blessing. The present time seemed “inopportune.” He asked if there was not abundance of work for all among the masses of their city, as in every other city of Europe. Could they say, he asked, that enough was being done for these masses, or that even one-third of them were reached by the Gospel message. In advising the Army to stay away from Geneva, he continued, were they prepared to take upon themselves the responsibility before the Judgment Throne in the last great day, of all the souls which the Army might be the means of saving, out of the 40,000 people in the city who never entered any place of worship. He added that he did not see what they had to fear from the arrival of the Army. In England it had been said that it had helped the churches and congregations in which there was spiritual life. Life could not hinder, hamper, or destroy life. They had opportunity and external advantages vastly greater than the handful of officers would have who might enter the city. They were in great numbers, they knew the city, the language, the people; they had, besides all their churches, a number of halls, among which were four capable of holding respectively 300, 500, 600, and 3,000 people. Surely there were men, means, and places enough to set the city in a blaze (spiritually speaking) in a few weeks if they were all baptized with the Holy Ghost; and so to outstrip anything the Army could do, or to counteract anything in its influence which they might consider harmful.[13] After this conversation the pastors parted from Colonel Clibborn with expressions of kindness and goodwill.

Colonel Clibborn continues:—“I proceeded to give three lectures upon ‘The aims, methods, and organization of the Salvation Army;—incidents of the work, women’s ministry, &c., &c. These meetings were instrumental to the awakening and conversion of many souls. I was a second time asked to meet a number of pastors and others. Many questions were put, and many objections were made to the Army and its methods. All these I patiently endeavoured to meet, but said that I did not at all expect to be able to satisfy them, nor was it necessary that they should agree with all the Army did. There were ‘differences of administration and diversities of operation’ in the divine economy. I explained that the Army having brought into prominence some great principles which had lain comparatively in the dust for centuries, it was not to be wondered at that strong opposition arose where these principles ran counter to existing religious traditions and customs. We consider the prophesy of Joel to be the key-note of the New Testament Dispensation, having been quoted by the apostle Peter on its inaugural day. The great design of the Army in its organisation and methods is to give the fullest scope to the accomplishment of that prophesy, which expressed the Divine intention that the Spirit should come upon ‘all flesh,’ and that all, young as well as old, women as well as men, uneducated as well as learned, should, under the energising, vitalising power of that spirit take part in the war for the salvation of the world.[14] One great aim of the Army is therefore that all the gifts of all its converts may be called out at the earliest moment, and have the fullest scope for exercise;—that, as in the good old days, the fisherman, the artizan, or the seamstress, may become the evangelists of their fellow workmen or women, without having to spend three or four years in college; that the Salvation Army evangelist might, like David, employ any and every instrument in praising his God, after his day’s work, and find joyful recreation in leading his fellows to the fountain of Life; that like the early Christians he might be ‘instant in season and out of season,’ exhort his fellow men ‘daily,’ go out into the streets and lanes and compel them to come in, and in his service for his Lord have the fullest opportunity to rise into the highest position of usefulness for which his gifts might qualify him, and thus become a blessing to thousands.

“The prevalent religious customs on the contrary restrict the joy of preaching the Gospel to the few—to educated persons of a certain age and of one sex—thus excluding more than half the human race.

“The Army was not the result of any preconceived plan, or of careful invention, but simply the gradual development of these and other great principles in active operation. The chief instrument which God had used in its formation,—Mr. William Booth,—had worked as an evangelist among the masses in all parts of England from seventeen years of age. Wholly consecrated to God, his efforts had been blessed to an extraordinary degree. Years of devoted labour among the working classes had gained him a profound acquaintance with their ideas, habits, likings, and antipathies, and had shown him that the prevailing modes of evangelisation were but imperfectly adapted to the end in view. They left a great section of the population comparatively untouched, and the good that was done was, he conceived, in great measure lost through the want of a system in which it could be perpetuated and multiplied by engaging in the work those who had been already won. God had granted to him a willingness to unlearn and to abandon any preconceived idea or theory, no matter how dear, which did not seem to conform to the great original Pentecostal idea, or to the stern facts realised in practical labour among the people.”

The following quotation from the writings of one well acquainted with the Army’s works from the first, may throw light on its origin:—

“Feeling a special call to Evangelistic work, Mr. William Booth resigned in 1865 his position and salary as a minister, and casting himself upon God, he began his work in the east end of London. Determined to follow the Spirit of God in all its leadings and at all costs, that he might be guided into the solution of the great problem of how to reach the masses with the Gospel, he commenced alone, Bible in hand, in an open space beside a crowded thoroughfare. The men and women of that poor quarter who grouped around him each day in the open air were invited to follow him to a little hall—thus began the processions. Transformed in character, under the powerful operation of the Spirit, these men, testifying publicly, in their rough dress, straight from their work, became the Evangelists of their fellow-workmen. The masses hated both the name and sombre garb of “religion,” but Salvation from sin was a practical thing which workmen or the loafers could understand and appreciate when manifested daily in the changed lives and homes, and happy testimony of their former mates or pals.

“The path thus entered upon was of necessity often a solitary and rugged one, beset with stupendous difficulties. Each new departure or novel method to attract the godless masses generally brought with it the estrangement of some of the friends who gave the work their pecuniary aid. Misrepresentation, misunderstanding, imputation of selfish or vainglorious motive succeeded. Nights of earnest prayer and painful thought and moments of extreme financial difficulty marked the track. But the cry of dying millions ever impelled him forward, and for seventeen years God had never failed to keep his promise, though faith was often tried to the utmost.

“Experience had convinced him of the true principle of evangelisation, and that in face of the great degraded masses a central direction in each meeting and in each department of work was an indispensable necessity to united and successful effort. As the artisan preacher dared not assume the name of clergyman or clergywoman, “captain” sprang into use as the easiest name by which to designate the leader of a meeting—a word very constantly used among the people to designate a leader—whether of a ship’s crew, a troop of soldiers, a fire brigade, or a pit gang. ‘General Superintendent of the Christian Mission’ was gradually abbreviated into ‘General.’ ‘Headquarters’ became substituted for ‘Central Office.’ The command of the Master, ‘Go ye out into the streets and lanes and compel them to come in,’ had in its practical working created the processions. The necessity of a head to the procession, visible from a distance in a crowded thoroughfare, had developed the flags. The principle of the employment of all the gifts of all the converts had developed the bands of all kinds of instruments. To the common people the drum did not seem less suitable or reverent as a call to prayer than the bell in the steeple.

“And finally, the Christian Mission, which had been described in one of its reports as a volunteer army of men and women banded together in efforts for the salvation of their fellow-creatures, adopted the name of the Salvation Army and rapidly assumed in all its various departments that form which has been in all ages found to be the best for the prosecution of a war. The simple uniforms were adopted not only as a guarantee of plainness of dress and as a safeguard against changes of fashion, but as a means of continually bringing the idea of salvation before the eyes of the public, and of giving it the opportunity of narrowly watching the movements of Salvationists.”





“Sunday the 10th of December,” wrote Colonel Clibborn, “was a great day of fête in commemoration of a victory over the Catholic Savoyards some two hundred years ago. It was the great annual carnival of the city in which the greater part of the population turned out into the streets in the masquerade, and the merrymaking was kept up for a week.

“The walls announced in great placards that according to the usual custom Pastor —— would give the popular lecture in the Great Reformation Hall, upon ‘the Escalade,’ on Sunday afternoon. On enquiry I ascertained that the hall would be unused all the rest of the day and all the following week on account of the fête. I was also told that it was largely used for fashionable concerts. This splendid hall, which seats 2,700 people, was built for evangelistic meetings, one-third of the money having been subscribed in England.

“The thought of that grand building remaining silent and empty during the Sunday evening and during all those days of the fête while the giddy multitude thronged the streets as in Vanity Fair, filled my heart with the intense desire to do something for the Lord at such a moment, when the emissaries of Satan would be let loose. It was said that it would be dangerous to hold a meeting that Sunday night, as the bands of masqueraders would probably try to enter and upset it, and that so entirely was that part of the city under the reign of the carnival that night that respectable people would not like to attend. The Committee, however, granted me the hall for the Sunday and Tuesday.

“Seeing that there would be many attractions of a worldly kind in the streets that evening, I endeavoured to make my placard particularly attractive by adding the statistics of the Army! And in order to be sure that all should understand that it was a spiritual war which was in question, I concluded it with the text, ‘Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.’

“In the afternoon the hall was crammed to its utmost standing capacity. As the aged Pastor told the oft-told story of how the Catholic Savoyards had attempted to enter the Protestant city in the night; how the alarm had been given and how they had been caught and killed; how old Madame ——, of unfading memory, had dropped the iron pot of boiling soup upon the head of the leader,—loud and prolonged applause rang through the building. Then a number of young men in white gloves stepped forward on the platform and sung a song composed for the occasion, and which praised God for the deliverance of their city out of the hand of the enemy upon that day so many years ago.

“I seized the opportunity, while they were getting into choral order, of handing a note to the Pastor, requesting him to announce my meeting in the evening; he tore it to pieces before the whole audience with a disdainful gesture. The great sacrifice made on Calvary was not a worthy subject to follow ‘the Escalade’ on that Sunday evening in the Reformation Hall! About eight hundred however, came in the evening.”

The earlier meetings held in the Reformation Hall were crowded generally, and always accompanied with that fulness of blessing which had been asked in prayer, and was expected by those who asked. The following is the testimony of a Pastor, concerning one which he attended:—

“I should like to give you my impressions of the Conference at the Reformation Hall, last Wednesday, on the subject of the work of the Holy Spirit. Those who were present soon became aware that the speaker was not about to give them a theological dissertation; but they felt that they were in the presence of a solemn reality, so much so as to recall the words: ‘Put thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.’ I shall make no analysis of the discourse to which we listened. It had indeed nothing in it of an exceptional nature, and, reported verbally by another not so fully penetrated with the spirit of the subject, would have no remarkable effect. But vivified throughout by the vital and profound convictions produced by the Spirit of God itself, the word spoken possessed a force which went direct to many consciences; one may say, it ran throughout the meeting like a volley of artillery. We well know that quite ordinary words spoken under such circumstances may strike to the soul like a sharp arrow. To this end, they must proceed from a heart entirely consecrated and filled with the Holy Spirit. How shall I tell you of my own experience as I left this meeting? I felt as one broken, burdened, annihilated. Never did I experience so deep and intense a feeling of my own complete misery and of the need that I had of the help of the Holy Spirit. I am convinced, if we were filled with that Spirit, He would work miracles in us and all around us. Why not? The promise is distinct, and the command positive—‘If ye being evil know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him?’ And the command is, ‘Be filled with the spirit.’ We are constantly praying for the Holy Spirit, but we do not receive it; there is something amiss in our prayers. We ask, perhaps, as certain professional beggars ask, who go from door to door begging bread, but who, well fed at home, do not for a moment care whether their petition is rejected or not. It is very different with those who ask as shipwrecked people crying for help, as they who are dying of hunger and thirst, beseeching a morsel of bread or a cup of water, or as miners buried under the earth by some terrible accident, sighing for air and light. We must ask with conviction, with faith, with constancy. It was only after nine consecutive days of unceasing prayer that the Apostles received this gift. So long as our prayers are unbelieving or languid they will remain sterile, and ourselves useless, unprofitable servants, however great our outward activity.

“To return to our brothers of the Salvation Army. May God keep and bless them! Let us pray much for them; for it is exactly those who are walking upon heights who are the most in danger of falling.”





A record of the struggle in Geneva would hardly be complete without allusion to the subject of the famous placard which gave offence to many, and which has been frequently discussed as among the doubtful means employed by Salvationists to attract to their meetings those classes of the people who are strangers to all religion and indifferent to any appeal addressed to them in the ordinary manner. This placard announced that at a meeting about to be held the “devise” of the Salvation Army, “Sang et Feu” would be explained; and that the Maréchale would open the attack. The promise here made was fulfilled, simply by an earnest address, first, on the words, “the blood of Christ Jesus His Son cleanseth us from all sin;” and secondly on those others, “He shall baptise you with the Holy Ghost and with fire,” bringing into view the full Salvation offered to all—absolution from the guilt of sin, and inward purification. I was present at a conference of friends in Switzerland, where the expediency of such a method of attracting the attention of masses was warmly discussed, and will endeavour to reproduce the impression which that discussion left on me. On the one hand, it was argued that such an announcement was calculated to “scandalize” the serious, the reverent, the refined and sensitive portion of the public, and thus must have done harm; on the other hand, the facts which followed the putting out of the placard were simply stated. These facts said more, it seemed to me, than any arguments. “True,” said Miss Booth, “this announcement seemed to you startling and perhaps bordering on the profane; but, fellow-Christians, our mission is not directed to you, but to a class of people whose views, tastes, ideas and habits are wholly different from yours. Now, what did that placard accomplish? It did for us exactly what we hoped. It brought up from the depths, so to speak, from the cellars and slums and hells of your city, a vast crowd of beings whom no ordinary call would have reached, whom no ordinary evangelizing efforts have yet won. They were struck by the words; seized with wonder and curiosity; even amusement was awakened; and they came with a great rush to see this novelty—to hear what these strange words might mean. They came with every motive except the right ones; but they came; and, thanks to our God, many of these demoniacs are now sitting clothed and in their right minds at the feet of Jesus. If there had been any other way, not offensive to the more refined classes, by which this mass of human beings could have been brought together, we would have adopted them: but other means had failed.”

I give the two views of the matter. Probably those who condemned the placard will continue to do so. Yet, after all, there is that mass of people. We cannot cart away human rubbish as we do refuse from a quarry or a coalpit. It will not lie passive where we place it, nor remain a harmless detritus beneath and behind our streets, in the cellars and dark quarters of whose existence we are scarcely aware. That rubbish is palpitating with life—with human, terrible, infinite, unquenchable life. There are hearts down there, hidden in those cheerless rooms, squalid offices or unwholesome kennels—hearts that beat, that love and hate and hunger and break; there are brains that work and invent and contrive to the imminent peril of society;—souls without hope, and lips that pour forth blasphemy.

You cannot reach these, Christian people, by the same appeals which are understood by civilized men and women; and will you not bear a little what wounds your sense of propriety, or even of what seems to you irreverence, in order to achieve the task of furnishing yourselves with the opportunity of reaching these masses? “Let all things be done decently and in order,” is a wise and useful counsel which, like many others, is applied sometimes at the expense of other truths. Decency and order and reverence are things unknown, in connection with the worship of God, or in any connection, to many of the persons of whom we are speaking. They may please and attract you; they are a necessity to you; but to reach those lower regions, what is wanted is rather a harsh trumpet call, an electric flash, the sound “as of a rushing mighty wind.” And as to Christians themselves! Can we say that they also do not need at times these disturbing influences to shake them out of the security or inactivity into which they may have lapsed in the midst of all their privileges, of all that is decent, orderly, reverent, and beautiful in ritual and religious observance?

The circumstances which preceded and followed the incident of the publication of the objectionable announcement may be briefly recounted. Miss Booth had addressed a meeting attended by a large number of the better-class people of Geneva, members of churches, and others, generally seriously disposed. An impression was made, and many tears shed during her address. But on leaving the meeting, troubled thoughts arose in her mind. “I am not satisfied,” she said, “this is all very well; but these are not the persons we came to Geneva to seek. We must reach that other world of human beings by whatever means.” And thus the idea arose of an announcement which would bring forward those beings. The expedient was successful. A meeting was held in the Casino Hall on the 22nd of December. That night the powers of light and darkness met with a crash that shook the city. On this occasion Miss Booth, standing at an open window looking upon the street where the crowds had gathered, called her companions to look down upon a motley gathering of human beings, the like of which she had not seen even in Paris or London, “a howling, biting, cursing mob,” impossible to describe. Some imagined the announcement was a challenge to a physical conflict; others that Geneva was to be attacked, that blood was to be shed, and the city set on fire! An old woman, it is said, expressed to one of her friends the hope that the taxes would not be raised by the invasion of this army which was spoken of.

The hall was crowded to its utmost capacity a quarter of an hour before the time, and the broad stone staircase was soon filled with a mass of people crushing for entrance. A band of students in coloured caps had come early and taken possession of the front of the galleries and other prominent positions in the hall. It was soon evident that an organised disturbance had been planned by them. The first hymn was interrupted by cries and ribald songs, which continued, almost drowning the prayer which followed.

But through and above the storm many a burning word or earnest invitation was launched forth in the All-powerful name, which found its way straight to hearts and consciences. The little band on the platform, confident in God, remained perfectly calm, delivering in the intervals of comparative stillness, the message of salvation with the power of the Spirit of God. The tempest began to be assuaged; by nine o’clock victory was evidently on the side of the Salvationists. Many who at first had been the most wild and noisy in the disturbances were listening attentively. Words of life, cutting through the uproar, had reached their hearts. Certain citizens of Geneva who were present have said that they never fully realised before that night the reality of the conflict between the powers of light and darkness. The leaders of the meeting appeared as persons girded with divine armour, wielding the sword of the spirit in such a way that the fiercest shafts of ridicule opposed to them by the bands of mocking students and others fell harmless to the ground. Now, at last, the invitation is given out to those who desire salvation, to come forward. A strong faith and a holy boldness indeed were needed for this letting down of the net into such troubled and raging waters. One after another bold scoffers of half an hour ago left their places, some trembling visibly under the power of that divine influence which had subdued them, and under the sense of personal guilt; and as they kneeled down (for the first time perhaps in their lives) there rose sweet and low, the beautiful hymn:—

Reviens, reviens, pauvre pécheur!

Ton Père encore t’attend.

Veux-tu languir loin du bonheur

Et pécher plus longtemps?



Chœur. O! reviens à ton Sauveur

Reviens ce soir,

Il veut te recevoir,

Reviens à ton Sauveur.





The power of music in aiding a holy cause is beginning to be better understood. Many hearts have been and are daily moved, stirred to godly sorrow, or to hope, by the message of peace and love conveyed in song. I have been struck by the effect produced in such meetings by the words of a hymn begun so softly that one could scarcely mark the moment at which the silence was broken by the first word, and gradually rising in clearness and power until it swelled into a full chorus. St. Augustine records the fact that the first sense of relief to his burdened soul, bowed down under the crushing sense of sin, came to him through the sweet singing of a little child in a garden,—“Take up the book, take up and read.” He obeyed the angelic summons, took up the book, and read those words which opened for him the gates of the Kingdom of Heaven.

To return. Now a divine influence seemed to steal over the meeting, hushing the crowd into a profound silence, while the pleading words of the chorus were repeated again and again. As the last verse was sung,

Reviens prodigue à la maison,

Reviens, ne sois pas sourd,

Après la mort plus de pardon,

Le jour de grâce est court—





the faces of many young and careless men betrayed signs of deep distress. A part of the audience now began to disperse. A tall man, a German workman, approaches the platform, and, with tears flowing fast, cries in broken French, “O pray for me, pray for me. I see my sins to-night; I am lost; I know not what to do; I was too cowardly to come forward; I feared to be laughed at. Will you not pray for me?” A few nights afterwards this man came out and gave himself to God. His testimony in the subsequent meetings was sublime; he has stood forward on the platform of the Reformation Hall, and told how he had been plunged in every abyss of degradation—how he formerly drank to a frightful excess—played cards till the small hours of the morning with debased comrades, and how his life had become a burden to him through sin. Now all was changed. The light of a glorious Salvation shone upon his path, and God had given him a joy above all others in working for the salvation of his comrades, though abuse and ridicule were often all he received in return.

The next night a similar meeting was held in the Casino. The hall again filled to its utmost capacity, while crowds stood in the street; other souls again seeking salvation. The following is from a French pastor, whose son, a student in Geneva, was one of those who were at this meeting.

“I cannot resist the pleasure of telling you how thankful I am towards God and the Salvation Army for all the good my dear son ... a student of theology, has received in your meetings at Geneva. The letters which he sends us make us weep for joy.

“On the 4th of January he wrote:—

“‘The Salvation Army will continue to do great good in Geneva. I passed a long night of watch with them on the 31st of December, which I shall never forget. Since then I am always happy, and can say, “Glory to God!” every hour throughout the day. There is much disturbance caused for the purpose of preventing the Army in its work, but every day it gains new converts. One of the leaders of a band of roughs does not fear, for the last week, to say that he is saved; also many others. I help these dear friends as much as possible, although at times it is very difficult....

“‘We have several meetings during the day. I can not, unfortunately, attend all of them, as my studies prevent me, but when I can, it is always with a new pleasure. I love you with all my heart; also my dear mother and brothers. I beseech these last to give themselves promptly to the Saviour, and not to do it as I, their eldest brother, did, for I remained a long while before I could dare to pronounce the name of Jesus.”

“Help us to bless the name of the Lord for such a result! To show my gratitude towards the Salvation Army, which does so much good among us, by the grace of God, I ask you to enter my name, through Mr. Herbert Booth, as a member of the Auxiliary of the Salvation Army. For this purpose I send you an order for twenty-six francs fifty cents., which I believe is equivalent to one guinea. This will be my subscription for 1883. I authorise you to make what use you like of this letter for the glory of God. Give my best wishes to Miss Booth. En Avant goes well here.—Believe me to be, dear Sir and brother, your devoted friend in Christ Jesus, the Great Captain of our Salvation,

“E. V., Pasteur.”





It was to this meeting that Charles Wyssa came, whose death occurred in September of this year, and at whose grave the arrest of Miss Booth and her companions took place. He wrote: “I was passing through the streets of Geneva, and my eye fell on the placard of the Salvation Army. That looks lively, I thought, and I went in.”



“That night Charles left the hall with the arrows of conviction sticking fast in his heart. Three days afterwards (Christmas Day), in the Reformation Hall, he rose and came forward with forty others and gave himself to the Lord. He immediately became the target for the fire of the whole atelier in which he worked. But so noble and so powerful was the testimony of his life, and so cheerfully and patiently did he bear all their mockery, that they were forced to acknowledge the reality of his salvation.

“One day, when violently attacked by his fellow-workmen, the foreman, though himself an infidel, approached and called out to them to cease their mockery, adding, ‘It would be better for you all if you were like him. You are a shame to our firm!’ (alluding to their dissipated lives).

“Many of his fellow-workmen came to hear him give his testimony in the great Reformation Hall. One night while a volley of mockery was poured forth, Charles stepped forward upon the platform, pale, but firm as a rock. ‘Ah!’ he said, ‘I now understand all this uproar and opposition. Why, if you pinch even a dog’s tail he will growl or bite. Somebody has got pinched since the Army came to Geneva, and of course he is angry. That “somebody” has been cast out of me, you know who he is—le demon!’ and then he went on to speak of the blessed Jesus who had come to live in his heart instead. Throughout those dark days, before and after the closing of the meetings and the expulsion of the Maréchale and officers, Charles was among those who stood the firmest and laboured the most actively as sergeant.

“He suffered through the consequences of the persecution. The cold which brought on his consumption dates from a Sunday morning in March when the soldiers of the Geneva corps gathered in the chill shadow of Salève cliff on the French frontier, before the mist had lifted from the valley, in order that they might worship God, as they were forbidden to do upon their native soil. His great desire during his long illness seemed to be to lose no opportunity of speaking of salvation to those who came to see him. I have sat by many a death-bed, seen many a triumphant death, but never have seen a face more radiant at the thought of the nearness of Heaven.”





It was Christmas Eve. The Salvationists had no hall. The officers went to the Committee of the great Reformation Hall, and pressed upon them the responsibility of allowing it to remain idle, while the attention of thousands was now aroused to the question of salvation. It was granted for two nights. A dense throng poured into the building each evening, filling every space. The scene of the Casino was repeated on a larger scale. The audience was for the greater part composed of people who never entered a place of worship. This evening was a marvellous revelation to some Christians present. For the first time, many of them afterwards said, they realized the awful state of the great mass of the population; they confronted the terrible fact that tens of thousands of persons, with eyes closed to the light, and strangers to the joy of salvation, were rushing down headlong to destruction. The cabarets, the dancing saloons, the drinking hells, the rendezvous of prostitution, and the theatres had poured their contents into the Reformation Hall. Socialists—men of every nationality—who had found refuge in Geneva came en masse. It must not be supposed that these audiences consisted mainly of the miserably poor; these, the poorest of the people, are probably less cynical and less formidable in their attitude towards spiritual truth than are the classes to whom the Gospel appeal was now mainly addressed in Geneva as also in Paris. There is a portion of the population of Geneva which is perhaps even more disintegrated and demoralized than that of Paris, owing to the admixture of international elements, possessing no common traditions of law or religion or national history, to which an appeal can be made. They are the refuse of the earth, so to speak, loosely thrown together, without guiding principles, absolutely without public spirit, unconscious of the existence of any common weal to be sought, lacking any kind of cohesion, and eager only in the pursuit of some isolated, individual, material interest. The editor of le Témoignage, who was present at one of the services at the Rue Oberkampff, in Paris, wrote:—

“There is one point of view from which one cannot but render an unanimous homage to the Salvation Army, that is, its ardent and devouring compassion for the wandering multitudes. That this Army may be very wrong, may itself paralyse its means of action in holding itself too much outside of the Church, is evident; but what is no less evident is that it reaches and takes hold of the masses upon whom I say that not only the Church, but the generous efforts of private persons, had little or no hold up to this time. In this respect its success seems to me striking. Every time I have attended other meetings of a religious character, it has never been without experiencing a piercing feeling of deception and regret. Always the same audience.... But the public which it was the object to gain, I said to myself—the public notoriously hostile—the public of our atheist press—the public of the great political meetings, in whose eyes Victor Hugo himself would pass for a clerical!—that public! Were is it? How is it to be acted upon? Very well; this public I have at last seen, I have seen it with my own eyes, at the meetings of the Salvation Army. And I have been rejoiced and moved, beyond all expression, to see it. In all my life I shall not forget the scenes at the opening of a new hall in Rue Oberkampff. My heart was divided between the very opposite sentiments of sorrow and joy in hearing these blasphemies and songs and cries, because at last! at last! the assault has been delivered, and the enemy struck in the face! And I had a very lively impression that my sentiments were partaken of by the members of the Army, to whose cold blood, energy, and, I will say, clever strategy, one would not know how to render sufficient homage in this emergency. They did not cease to repeat with a tone of conviction, ‘Your tumult will be appeased; one day, you, who blaspheme the most at this moment, will perhaps be the first to surrender. This is the position on which we wish to plant our standard, and we will plant it here.’”





These words apply equally to the case of Geneva.

To return to the meeting in the Hall of the Reformation, a large part of the audience (of the nature described above) were so entirely strangers to the idea of worship or of an Invisible Being to be addressed in worship, that the sound of prayer called forth loud, derisive laughter, with questions and cries of surprise and scorn. This would have been enough to daunt any evangelists except those who, strong in faith in the miracle-working power of the Holy Ghost, fear nothing, neither the loud blasphemy of the multitude, nor the powers of hell let loose in their midst. Every lull in the uproar was taken advantage of by the speakers to fling some javelin from the armoury of God’s Word into the midst of the opposing and surging host. The uproar itself even seemed at times to render more pointed the words spoken in a clear unfaltering voice which cut their way through it. Many an arrow went home, as subsequent histories—not only told in words, but acted out in changed and holy lives—have abundantly testified.

A more select meeting for prayer followed. In order to hold this in a calmer atmosphere, the members of the Army retreated to the smaller hall behind the platform. A crowd followed, and in a few moments the place was filled to suffocation. The impression of what followed can never be forgotten by those who witnessed it. While the roar of voices gradually died away in the larger hall, a feeling of deep solemnity fell upon those assembled for the prayer meeting. They had seen the collision between the powers of light and darkness; and the stillness which followed resembled the silence which succeeds a storm, in which clouds full charged with electric fire had met in the midst of the hissing and smoke and roar of the warring elements. To the faith of some it might have seemed that they saw again in anticipation the vision granted to Our Saviour, when he said, “I saw Satan fall like lightning from heaven.”

Some of the ringleaders of the disturbance had pushed their way into the smaller hall; but there they remained perfectly still, subdued and overawed, with an expression on their faces of intense interest, which showed that they felt that they were in presence of a reality in religion which they had not before encountered. The officers did not fail to take advantage of the scene which had just been witnessed to urge their hearers to flee from the wrath to come, and be as decided for Christ as the rioters were against Him. The presence of God was realised in an extraordinary degree. The hymn was sung—

“Tel que je suis, pécheur rebelle,

Au nom du Sang versé pour moi,

Au nom de ta voix qui m’appelle,

Jésus, je viens à toi.”





The resolution expressed in these words found an echo in many hearts; and then there followed a scene such as, it was said, had never been witnessed in Geneva. More than forty persons (careless or mocking, a few minutes before), arose, and one after another came forward, and kneeling down, surrendered themselves to God, before the whole meeting. The officers of the Army spoke to one and another of “the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the world;” and again arose the chorus of the hymn—

“Ôte tous mes pêchés

Agneau de Dieu, je viens a Toi;

Ôte tous mes pêchés.”





The following is the experience, given by himself, of one who had gone with the herd of cynics and sceptics to the meeting at the Casino, and now came to the Reformation Hall:—“I was like the demoniac of Gadara. I can say I was possessed; I was chained for fifteen years to a frightful life. I was lost, my health ruined, my nerves shattered. I gave myself up to despair. Everyone shunned me like a leper; but I refused to go to the Great Physician of my soul, for in spite of all I clung to my sin, and sacrificed everything to it. I contemplated suicide. It was then that you arrived. I was at first astonished; then remorse seized me. Then followed a frightful torment in my soul,—a real hell. I resolved to put an end to it one way or another. Yet I thought I would go and hear you once more.

“I had been in darkness and anguish since the day of the first meeting,—on the point of committing suicide. No word had I been able to recall of that day’s teaching,—nothing remained in my memory, except the words of the sacred song, ‘Ôte tous mes pêchés’—(‘Take all my sins away.’) These sounded in my heart and brain through the day and the sleepless night—these, and these only. Bowed down with grief and despair, again I came to the Reformation Hall, and to the after meeting. The first sounds which fell on my ear, were again those very words, ‘Take all my sins away,’ and then you (to Miss Booth) spoke on the words, ‘though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow;’ you seemed to speak to me alone, to regard me alone,—and I felt it was God who had sent me there to hear those words.”

When, Christian, in the “Pilgrim’s Progress,” came to a certain place where there was a cross and a tomb, his heavy burden rolled away and he was free. Such a place of deliverance did this burdened soul now find on that Christmas Day, the anniversary of the Saviour’s birth, the birthday of that Swiss Salvation Army. “Oh! if you knew,” he said, “the struggle I had to go through. I spent a night in prayer to God which I shall never forget. At last I came off with victory. Ah! yes, my God, Thou art good, Thou didst uphold me. Now all is well. I shall have to pass through much trial, but I am so happy now to be saved; I have thrown behind me and forsaken all my sins.”

New Year’s Eve was marked by a fresh baptism of spiritual life. The day is still spoken of as an era in the spiritual history of many, and allusions to it occur in the letters of many of the converts, who then consecrated themselves afresh to God’s service and prayed to be made willing and able to suffer all His will. The clouds of persecution were already gathering black and gloomy around them; and there, at the foot of the Cross, they felt and confessed that nothing but the spirit and power of early Christianity could fit them for the conflict. Hour after hour their fervent prayers arose as they remained prostrated before the Lord. This young band of new-born souls entered the New Year upon their knees.

Evidence now began to come from all sides of blessing received in many homes, of wild sons reclaimed, of drunkards and vicious men transformed by the power of God, of light and joy brought into families over which a cloud had hung. In several cases husbands and wives who had separated were re-united, old enmities were forgotten, and enemies reconciled. A workman who had come under this transforming influence came to confess to his employer that he had stolen some materials from his atelier for his own use, and to make restitution.

Meetings for consecration were held in the early mornings, before the dawn of day. Often as the gas was turned out at dawn, giving place to the gray light of the morning which fell upon this crowd of kneeling people, or upon those who had found the full freedom they had sought, and were now rejoicing in the Saviour, it seemed an image of the spiritual change,—the dull light of self disappearing, and the dawn of the true light arising upon their souls.

One of these morning meetings was thus described by an aged Genevese gentleman of ripe experience:—

“I was present at seven a.m. on Sunday morning. Oh, it was a Pentecost! hundreds kneeling—children, men, and women. I cannot express what I experienced. I never passed such moments. I was melted down before the Lord. I could only cry, ‘This is Thy Spirit, O Lord! this is Thy Spirit!’... The tongues of flame alone were wanting to show us by our bodily vision the presence of the Holy Spirit. But they were not absent; our hearts saw them. The language of my heart was, ‘Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace; for mine eyes have seen Thy Salvation.’”





Another Genevese thus wrote of the early morning meetings:—

“Such a Sunday morning as we have witnessed to-day will by many never be forgotten. It has been said that there has never been seen anything like it since the time of Calvin. Oh, with what divine influence were we surrounded. While singing the hymn—

‘Accept my sacrifice,

’Tis on Thy altar laid,’





we believe many truly laid their all on the altar. The attention of that vast audience was concentrated on Jesus. We drew nigh unto Him, and He drew nigh unto us. The intense earnestness of those prayers was such that many unconsciously spoke at the same time, acknowledging their unfaithfulness with tears of repentance. Jesus Himself was there, pardoning, and breathing peace into their troubled hearts. The meeting closed with a song of triumph in which heart and voice united....

“It is with joy we learn from all sides that the Spirit of God is working among the Churches; special meetings are now being convened for the purpose of drawing in the unconverted; and we receive striking testimonies of God’s power. One cannot be astonished that the devil is doing all he can to injure us. But, forward, comrades! Walk in the light—have no fellowship with the works of darkness. Live to please God—to realise each instant the sweetness of His approval. Know nothing among men but Christ Jesus, and Him crucified; then victory is yours.”





Personal testimonies must have a force far beyond that of mere general statement, for all who believe that God has made the true progress of mankind to rest upon the quickening of the individual soul. I give a few such, selected with some difficulty (owing to the embarras de richesse) from many hundreds.

A Correspondent of foreign journals who had come to the meetings with the sole intention of turning them into ridicule, and who till then had professed to believe that all religion was a hypocrisy and a mockery, wrote:—

“Thanks be unto God, even I am saved! For a long time I had wished to find the light, but could not find it. I imagined I could correct evil by evil, but never reached my object. I saw the evils of the world, and looked out for truth and justice, but found no impersonation of them. I thought that the Christian religion was a kind of madness, or a collection of mysteries. I should like to have had all its representatives burnt—churches, priests, books—all! When I first attended the meetings of the Salvation Army, I was struck by the sincerity of the character of its officers. I perceived that they possessed something which I did not possess. But I said to myself at first, ‘it is only the phlegmatic English temperament.’ But, by-and-bye, my whole being was turned upside down. I could no longer think, read, nor write. In fact, I had been shot through! I had no more peace. I could do nothing, and thus I decided to give myself up entirely and without reserve to the Saviour.”

The Federal Council, in its rejection of the appeal of Miss Booth at a later date, cites the opinion of a medical man, who asserted that persons in a weak or melancholy state of mind had been driven into greater darkness or madness by the influence of the Salvation Army. From a large collection of testimonies which tend in the very opposite direction, I may give the following:—

“To the glory of our God I am able to say that I have passed from darkness to light! My life—hitherto without hope, without aim, and utterly useless—is transformed. I lived in rebellion against God. He sent me many trials, but I constantly hardened myself against His will; I tried to be sufficient for myself. Falling at last under a burden which was too heavy for me, I wrapped myself in my solitary pride, and lived alone. In spite of many hard lessons and the reiterated calls of my Saviour, to which I refused to respond, I hardened my heart. What I have suffered it is impossible for me to express. I locked myself up in silence and reserve, sometimes endeavouring to put on a smiling face, sometimes seeking a moment of oblivion in recreations of one kind or another. At times I was tempted to fling myself into the intoxications of the world in order to deaden my misery, but I hated the world as much as I fled from God. It was too noisy for my broken heart. But now darkness is turned into light.”[15]

A man of fifty years of age rose in one of the meetings, and said:—“I have been an unbeliever, estranged from God, living honourably according to the world, but caring nothing for spiritual things. I came to these meetings, and to the knowledge and love of Jesus Christ. It was at a meeting at seven in the morning that I first felt my sinfulness and saw my life as a failure (vie manquée), and Jesus has pardoned me. O! what joy have I missed throughout my whole life!”

Another thus speaks:—“The first time I came to hear you, I left the meeting with very different feelings to those with which I entered; your beaming countenances, in which one saw expressed a happiness beyond anything earth can give, made so great an impression on me. Then I said to myself, here is the religion which I need; it is not sad or gloomy.” Again another:—“In the face of all the calumnies spread abroad against the Salvation Army, I feel it my duty to declare publicly that, so far as I have seen for myself, all that is said against them is absolutely false. I have followed almost all their meetings at Geneva, and had opportunities of observing the officers closely. I found the Salvation Army a true family, whose members are bound together by the strongest ties of Christian friendship. To those who call them hypocrites I would say, ‘come and see for yourselves. Question them, live with them as I have done, and if you can then discover that their lives or conduct are not just and upright, you can blame or accuse them at your ease. But take care not to judge them until you know them.’ Each time that I came in contact with the Salvation Army, I experienced a happiness and joy of which I had had no knowledge before; and while I lived among them I learned how complete is their disinterestedness, and how great their courage in supporting the grossest insults for their Master’s sake.”

Another independent witness says.—“One did not need to be a profound psychologist in order to foresee that the Salvation Army would draw its most hearty converts and its best supporters from the ranks of the very persons who at the first met it with the most violent, gross, and deep-seated opposition. These persons could not fail, sooner or later, to be struck with that ‘demonstration of the Spirit and of power’ which accompanies the appeals of these sincere and joyous evangelists. Wherever the Army has passed, it is from the benches of the mockers that they have the most largely recruited the benches of the penitents.” It is impossible not to remark in connection with this indisputable statement, on the suicidal folly of the men at present in positions of power in Switzerland, in forbidding access for the people to this powerful influence. Is not the power of the Holy Spirit the one and only influence which is able to transform that mass of miserable humanity, these “dangerous classes,” into good citizens and subjects; the only influence which can avert the moral and political bankruptcy apparently impending for their country? The sorrowful words have often risen to our lips, in connection with that fair city, “Oh, Geneva, if thou hadst known, even in this thy day the things that belong to thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes.”

The following is a testimony of another kind, but not less powerful. It is an extract from La Scène, a theatrical gazette of Geneva, of February 6th, 1883, before the expulsions:—

“The Department of Justice and Police has just issued a warrant forbidding the exercises of the Salvation Army. We congratulate the Department and the Federal Council without reserve upon this measure. But what would have been still more simple would have been expulsion in regular form. People do not spare the parasites who live and fatten on the public credulity; why spare those who open a shop to sell righteousness just as formerly indulgences were sold; persons from whom are not even demanded the necessary passports and papers, and who did not even pay for their permit of residence, nor for the police license to exercise their trade of public cheats? Popular good-sense has meted out the proper measure of justice to these cynical play-actors who parody religion, and we believe that it was high time that the Department of Justice and Police should appear on the scene, otherwise the people themselves would have scourged these sinners from the temple.”





The same paper, on Monday, 19th February (after the expulsions), has the following, under the heading “Theatrical Chronicle”:—

“Since the departure of the Salvation Army our theatre has lost a formidable rival, and the crowd are beginning to find their way back to us. The most terrible blow received by these speculators was the pamphlet of Madame the Countess de Gasparin. This courageous writer, in language elegant, modest, and full of conviction, has well defended religious Geneva, so outrageously insulted. She has fought step by step, entrenchment by entrenchment, these sorry soldiers, male and female, who make use of the name of God in order to live by their speculations. She has exposed, in a careful verbal translation whose exactitude a few cowards have dared to doubt, the cleverly designed plan of campaign of the bank of Booth & Co. In short, she has opened the eyes of those who only saw in the Salvation Army a religious sect which our laws should protect, and which should be allowed to carry on its work. All honour to Madame de Gasparin, and hearty thanks!”





To return to the experiences of the Army previous to the expulsions. At one of the evening meetings a Salvation soldier came to ask Colonel Clibborn to speak to a young man at the further end of the hall. On going down he found a man of about thirty years of age leaning against the wall, with tears in his eyes, and his whole appearance indicating deep emotion. He said, “Oh, I am so wretched; I cannot sleep, I cannot rest, I don’t know what to do. I see I shall have to give up my present employment; and yet to do that is to sacrifice all I have.” He said he was a Greek, and that his employment was that of a correspondent of newspapers in Greece and Constantinople, for which he was expected to write flippant and scoffing articles. When the Army first came to Geneva he had written articles turning it to ridicule, in a style which would suit the taste of those papers. But while attending the meetings in order to get material for his articles, he became thoroughly convinced of the sincerity and disinterestedness of the Army workers, which surprised him, as he had always looked upon all religion as a hypocrisy and a swindle. A Greek newspaper editor having asked him to send extracts from “La Verité à l’egard de l’Armée du Salut,” he began the translation of that work. He had not gone far before he became completely convinced of the truth of all he read. “The book,” said he, “when rendered into Greek was like an exquisite poem! Ah! I used to believe in dynamite as the remedy for social wrongs, but now I see that there is another power which can turn the world upside down and set all wrong things right.” Colonel Clibborn pressed him to submit to that power at once, to obey his conscience, and give his heart to God. A terrible struggle was going on in his soul. He said that after conviction had come upon him he had written an article defending the Army, and had at once received an angry letter from the editor. His companions, seeing the change, also wrote to Constantinople saying that he had sold himself to the English for 5,000 francs. His conscience did not allow him either to continue his employment, or to ask for the money owing to him, as he felt he had earned it wrongly; and yet he could find no other work. At times the temptation was strong to stifle his convictions. The old scoffing spirit and unbelief would struggle for the mastery; his great spiritual enemy suggesting to him that he was a weak fool, and that all his convictions about God and salvation were a delusion. Colonel Clibborn pressed him to put the matter to the test there and then by a whole-hearted surrender; but he said the sacrifice was too great; he could not take such a leap in the dark, or trust God when he saw starvation before him, having already failed in every effort to get other employment. But God did not let him go. As he continued to read the Bible and attend the meetings his conviction strengthened and deepened. One evening he had fallen into a state of almost complete despair. He had been obliged to sell his watch and other things in order to buy food, and he seemed weak, as if he had scarcely eaten anything for several days. “Oh!” he said, “I am lost, lost! I have left the service of the Devil, and yet God won’t have me. I have fallen between the two.” Again he was pressed to trust. He said he could not trust God in the way described to him. He could not trust blindly. If he only had employment then he could believe. They showed him that it was just this entire abandonment of himself to God that was necessary. Colonel Clibborn knelt down with him, and after a time while they were praying, the poor Greek broke forth, saying, “There! I can’t hold out any longer. I give myself to God. He can do with me what He likes. It’s done. He may have me!”

“It was dinner time when he was about to leave,” wrote Colonel Clibborn. “Oh, how hard I felt it not to be able to ask him either to have some dinner with me or to give him something with which to buy himself food. I dared not even give him a few francs from my own money, so gross had been the falsehoods in circulation about our giving money to people to bribe them to speak in our meetings. I knew also that his own independent spirit would prompt him rather to starve than to allow even the shadow of a pretext for such stories by even taking a mouthful of food. Alas! how cruel is the world. A gentleman had openly stated a few days before that we paid four francs each to our converts, and this had gone all over the town and into the papers with the usual additions, and had excited the rage of the people against us. He subsequently wrote the same to Neuchâtel, with a like result, and yet never had a centime been given to one of our converts from the very first. We even decided once not to employ one of our converts who was out of work for the moment, when we had some work which he might have done, lest the enemy should have a pretext for such stories. The next time I met the Greek, he was, as I expected, enjoying the full assurance of salvation; all his burden gone. Though an educated man, he had (like a true Salvation soldier) accepted an offer of employment as a labourer in the fields in order to earn his living.” This man had formerly been under police surveillance as a dangerous socialist, but had now placed himself en regle as a peaceful and law-abiding citizen. All the conflicts and despair of soul had gone, and the peace of God was in his heart.

He afterwards rose in one of the meetings, and stated that, “when they spoke to me of Jesus Christ, I replied, ‘Don’t talk to me of Him; He was a vagabond and a wild fanatic.’ When I was young my mother gave me a Bible, and I threw it into the river in a rage.” Some time after the expulsions, when the Geneva soldiers crossed the frontier to meet their leaders in Savoy or Vaud, the Greek would also come, when it was evident from his speech and countenance that he was “continuing steadfast in the faith.” During the persecutions he had much to suffer. On one occasion he was savagely attacked, knocked down, and cruelly beaten.

The following is extracted from a letter published by a Genevan lawyer, in reply to a hostile criticism:—

“When the Salvation Army arrived amongst us, preceded as it was by the reputation which the newspapers had already made for it, there were but few Christians who were not troubled or hurt. But these impressions were singularly modified among the best part of those who, having seen the work, followed it without taking any part, anxious to form their judgment upon what they heard and saw, and not upon what they had merely read.

“Several have even gone so far as to consider that they were witnessing a work which brought them back, in a greater degree than any one would have imagined possible in this century, to what must have taken place in the primitive Church at the time and during the preaching of the apostles.

“It is an incontestable fact that under the action of the Salvation Army a powerful movement the like of which has never been before witnessed among us, has been produced in Geneva. An evident action of the Holy Spirit has manifested itself. The question which is called ‘exciting par excellence,’ that of perdition or salvation, has been placed before a multitude of men and women of all classes; it is a question which up to the present they have succeeded in avoiding; and it has not been put forward, as your correspondent is pleased to say, ‘under a form more or less grotesque,’ but under a form most serious and incisive. Hence this display of unheard of anger on the part of a population which has felt itself wounded in its pride, disturbed in its false security, troubled in its conscience, and obliged to face a question which it found most irksome.

“As to the opposition of Christians, it is kept up undoubtedly by many who do not render the full sense of the word conversion as meant in the Bible, and therefore do not attach sufficient importance to it; whilst others will only hear of one sort of conversion, namely, that of people well placed, of good education, grave, instructed, and with whom the question is well thought out. But there is not, thank God, only that one kind of conversion for people who receive an independent income and who are well educated. That which is adapted for some may not suit others.”





The Swiss adherents of the Army in Geneva continued to increase daily after the expulsions and during the heat of the persecutions. Many interesting extracts might be made from a mass of correspondence which has been placed at my disposal, between these hunted but happy people, the reading of which transports one in imagination to the times of the persecutions of the Huguenots in France or the Covenanters in Scotland. The “kitchen meetings” were very much frequented. A soldier writes of one:—“We ended our meeting by thanking God for His presence, and asking Him to be with us the remainder of the day. We then left our Hallelujah kitchen to meet again at three in the afternoon; for, although we have no halls, we manage to meet in kitchens and parlours, kindly lent us by friends of the Army. Some of us met in a parlour; the others with Lieutenant Thonger in the open-air. They all had a great blessing; and although we were not all together, we felt we were all with the same God. We closed our meeting at half-past four to meet again at eight in a Hallelujah shop, where we thought there would be room enough for all who knew we had a meeting; but when we arrived there at five minutes to eight we found everything full, kitchen, stairs, shop, and all, and lots unable to get in; so Lieutenant Thonger walked off with a detachment to another Hallelujah kitchen. We had a splendid day. Six meetings altogether. Our soldiers here are a brave set; some of them know what it is to go through the fire; some are very much persecuted, but in spite of it all they are faithful soldiers of the Cross.”

One result of the persecution became now sadly visible at Geneva, and later at Neuchâtel, in the breaking down of the health of officers and soldiers and friends in consequence of the choking atmosphere of the meetings, which they were obliged to hold only in small, out-of-the-way, and sometimes unwholesome rooms. At Geneva no private rooms could be found large enough to hold the little army, and though the town was divided into four districts, each to have its meeting, the same state of things repeated itself everywhere, and the windows having to be kept shut, in order to avoid attracting the attention of the police or populace, the result soon became painfully visible.

Colonel Clibborn was obliged to remain a month absent in the north of Switzerland through illness (his lungs having been most seriously attacked from this cause). “It made my heart bleed,” he says, “on returning to Geneva to find two of our devoted Swiss friends, who had opened their houses to the meetings, completely broken down, and, though strong, robust men of middle age, bent and feeble through the violence of the malady in their lungs.”

Shortly after the closing of the meetings, the following letter, signed by seventy-two mothers of families, was received by Miss Booth:—

“We, the undersigned mothers, desire to give our testimony and to prove by many facts to all the persons with whom we have any influence—

“1. That the Salvation Army since its arrival in Geneva has been, under the powerful hand of God, the blessed instrument of the salvation of our children.

“2. That we have no fears in regard to the influence of the Salvation Army upon our children; seeing that its officers draw their teaching, exhortations, and encouragements from the Bible alone, whence also they draw the force which animates them, and according to which they rule their lives and conduct.

“3. That, as mothers and as women who love their families and their fatherland, we can only bless the Lord for the good which he has brought to us and our children by means of the Salvation Army. We ardently desire that those of our families who have not yet embraced salvation may do so; and we pray that they may become the faithful disciples of Jesus Christ and valiant soldiers of the Salvation Army.”

(Here follow seventy-two signatures.)





A similar letter was received by Miss Booth a few days later, signed by upwards of thirty more mothers of families.

Throughout the period of the persecutions the chief weapons of attack were furnished by the religious press of Switzerland. The first personal attack upon Miss Booth—and the only one of this kind which appeared, reproduced in the secular press—was signed “A Woman.” This anonymous writer was the first to apply the epithet of saltimbanques (mountebanks) to the Salvationists; a name at once caught up by the comic and worldly papers, and afterwards constantly applied to them.[16] It was a religious paper of Geneva which gravely suggested that an explanation of the power exercised by the Salvation Army might be found in mesmerism. This idea also was caught up by the secular press. Sceptics, and Christians who have forgotten that we are living under the dispensation of the Holy Spirit, may well be perplexed to account for the spiritual power which is working marvels in our day, not among one class, or one Salvation Army alone, but among all Christians whose eyes are enlightened to read the signs of the times and the will of God. The unbelievers of Judea said of Christ, “He casteth out devils by the prince of devils,” and of the inspired band on the day of Pentecost they said, “These men are full of new wine.” Translated into the language of modern cynics or roughs, we have here a repetition of the same accusations in the attribution to the instruments of God’s loving will of a force called animal magnetism. “They mesmerise the people,” said the polite critics. “They are drunk,” said the roughs. Alike strangers to the spiritual world, it was impossible for them to understand this mysterious power under which the strongest men, hardened in vice, or confirmed in unbelief, were broken down under the hand of God—the God who “woundeth and maketh whole,” who “killeth and maketh alive.” This charge of magnetism or mesmerism prevailed to such an extent for a time, that the Salutists found their every movement, every glance of their eyes, suspiciously watched in the meetings, while even Christians shrunk from their approach with a vague dread. Others asked, however:—“Can magnetism save the drunkard from the dominion of his ruling passion, break the chains of habit for the profligate and set him free to live a life of purity, convince the materialist of the existence of God, restore concord and love to families long blighted by selfishness and sin, bring the lost prodigal back to his father’s house, reconcile deadly enemies, and, in a word, work miracles of transformation in hearts, lives, and homes?” “Mesmerism!” said a mother of a family. “If mesmerism can work such a change as has been worked in my house, and turn a dissolute, cruel-hearted son into a sober, affectionate and happy man, then I wish all Geneva were mesmerised.” Not the smallest of the trials of those dark days was the consciousness of distrust and superstitious dread with which this charge of mesmerism for a time surrounded the Salvationists.

Among the letters which Miss Booth received after her expulsion, was one signed, “A mother whose family has been restored to her by the Salvation Army.” A poor woman, the mother of an invalid son, wrote that since he had become a convert, his peevish spirit had changed to one of patience and joyfulness; “formerly he always grumbled about his food; nothing pleased him; but now he is always satisfied.” A young man of weak mind, whose mental infirmity had taken the form of dislike, or rather positive hatred, to his brother and the rest of his family, became so changed that he could now never do enough, he deemed, for his family, and for that brother in particular. His limited powers and intelligence forbade his doing anything great, but he would show his love by brushing his brother’s clothes, blacking his boots, and watching every opportunity of serving him. How lovely are the “peaceable fruits of righteousness” in the weakest and most despised, as well as the highly gifted!

On an occasion when it was impossible to have the Reformation Hall for mixed audiences, Miss Booth obtained it for a meeting of women. It was filled with women only; three thousand being present. A great number of letters pouring in subsequently, proved the vital work which was accomplished in many hearts on that day.

The following is from an old citizen of Geneva:—

“On Sunday last the Salvation Army held a meeting at 5 o’clock in the morning at the Casino. The meeting was led by Miss Wallis, who made a simple but very impressive address upon several Biblical passages. There is in the early hours of Sunday morning a peculiar solemnity which inclines us more than at other times to heart-searching. I can never forget the moment when all were invited to consecrate themselves entirely to the Saviour. I saw advance and kneel down, one by one, no inconsiderable portion of the audience until there was no longer any more room for them. The little platform and pulpit were surrounded by a crowd of people in earnest prayer. One could not move, and those who were still seated had to rise to make way for the numbers who continued to press forward to kneel in their turn, and to testify publicly their determination to serve God faithfully. Among them were many men, and all ages were represented; but there was no trace of ephemeral excitement. I stood by the side of the platform, and handed one chair after another, as I contemplated with deep emotion this assembly on its knees. Prayers followed each other so spontaneously and rapidly that they sometimes became almost simultaneous. One of the last of those who spoke was a man well known, addicted to drunkenness, who after having signed the pledge, had been again on the point of falling. A hindrance of another kind had also held him enchained. He felt that this Sunday was the day of sacrifice, and testified publicly of his resolution to give up all in order to win all, and in that hour his heart was filled with joy.

“Oh, joyful day! Every one seemed to have forgotten that the instrument which God had made use of was the Salvation Army. The human no longer pre-occupied their minds—each soul was face to face with God alone. Church of Geneva, awake! Forget the instrument of which God in these days avails Himself to call thee to a new and perhaps glorious destiny! Let us recognise that we have allowed ourselves to be swallowed up by considerations of forms, of ministries, of orthodoxy, and by jealousies of congregations, by doubt, by lukewarmness, by coldness. Do not let us lose our time in learned criticisms. Let us break through these old barriers—let us confess that we have SOMETHING TO LEARN!

(Signed)      “An Old Genevan Gentleman.”





M. Favre, who has a number of mission halls in Geneva similar to those of Mr. M‘Call in Paris, publicly stated at his annual meeting that his work, far from having been injured by the army movement had been greatly helped, and though he had had a little more disturbance in consequence of a larger attendance of the more turbulent class, the blessing had increased in proportion. This fact will interest those who have read the charges against the Army of fettering the work of others.

The following was received by Miss Booth after her expulsion:—“We ask ourselves still, even to-day, can it be true that all these events which have just taken place are indeed a reality? Is it really possible that they have driven from among us the friends who have done us so much good? Something tells me they shall come back again. Oh, what a blessed thing it is to know that nothing happens without the permission of God, and that He brings good out of evil! For this, as for all else, we cast ourselves into His arms, and all will be well.”

Also the following:—

“Dear Maréchale,—I must tell you, with the expression of my sincere gratitude, how we thank you. Thanks to you and to all, for the good which has come to our families since we attended the meetings of the Salvation Army. Our house was indeed before a Christian house, but everything has been changed since we understood the work of sanctification. That teaching needs to be restored to the place where God put it in His word. I am now astonished not to have earlier understood these truths. I now understand why we did not go forward; or rather how it was that we went backward, dragging ‘this body of death.’...

“I take up my letter again, where I stopped eight days ago. How many sad things have happened since. How much we have suffered; how much must your heart be torn in seeing so much evil, so much iniquity, so much sin. And what must make your heart bleed most must be the false accusations of those so-called Christians who use their high social position in favour of the work of God’s enemies.

“I think, dear Maréchale, that you suffer less than we do, because you have come to give up all. Indeed, it must be so, else how could anyone support such a terrible weight? But we know that God is strongest, and that He can open the doors which Satan is trying to shut.”

I give the following, from a number of letters I have been allowed to read, showing the loving and simple relation in which her girl officers and workers stand to Miss Booth. Some of these epistles are full of brightness and wit, as well as fond affection.

“My darling Maréchale, M. Audeoud has been fined 50 francs for letting us have meetings in his own grounds. Shameful! But he will not pay it; so what will be done I don’t know....

“I went to ——, and we had a blessed meeting amongst all the girls there. I like ——; but she is not properly saved, but still I believe she soon will be. She goes to the meetings with her mother. I like her mother, too, but she is one of those who talk a good deal too much, a thing I hate with all my heart. Her little girls are good—they come to our soldiers’ meetings. Oh, we are working for the salvation of the young and the old, that we may raise up a blessed army to serve God with all their might.

“Precious Maréchale, we all pray for you, and believe hard for your return to Geneva; it must be soon; the Lord will answer, and that very soon. I often think your crown will be very bright when you go home to the Lord, for you have gone through so much fire—fire that purifies and makes bright; and those very people that caused you to pass through such fire will envy you then. I pray that I may have a little place at your feet there, and as near the dear Lord as I can get. I cannot help praising Him for all the trouble, for I know that blessed are they who suffer for His name’s sake. Oh, that He should think us worthy to suffer for Him; to be despised as we are for the name of Christ! Jesus is at our head. The dear Lord will help you. It will be victory! all along the line!

“Accept a heart full of love, and believe me ever yours, to live fighting by your side, fighting for the salvation of the world, and to go from your side to be with Him in heaven, where we shall never part.”

A Swiss citizen wrote at this time:—

“In face of all the wicked things that are being said and printed with reference to the work of the Salvation Army in our dear land of Switzerland, I feel the obligation incumbent upon me as a Christian of Switzerland to express to you for my own part my whole-hearted thanks and most sincere affection for the great spiritual good that you are doing here in Geneva, not only in bringing a great number of sinners to repentance, but in reviving and refreshing a great number of Christians who were altogether asleep with reference to their state. I am one of the latter number, but I feel,—by the contact with your burning love for souls, your heroic devotion to the cause of Christ, your holy enthusiasm for the conquest of the world to the Kingdom of our Divine Redeemer—I feel again burning in my own soul the flames of my first love for my Master, and the desire to consecrate myself anew to the service of my Saviour.”

A Pastor wrote:—

“The spirit of God has been working in a marvellous way all round my parish, unknown to you. Many husbands who have been separated from their wives have been re-united to them by the influence of your meetings and our visits, all inspired by the holy fire lit in my heart by the Army. On all sides I am now called to minister to broken hearts.”

The following from a mother concludes these extracts:—

“The Lord, who knows all things, saw at Geneva that there were souls thirsting and famishing for truth and light. He sent His servants to do more in two months than has been done in long years. I was very unhappy in my soul when they came. But their entire consecration, the complete abandonment of their will, made me understand in the depths of my heart all that my life lacked. Glory to God, I am now assured that I am fully saved through the blood of Jesus Christ, and by His Holy Spirit sanctified each day, and kept each hour to do the will of my Heavenly Father upon earth as it is done in Heaven. Five of my children have passed from darkness to light, and are ready to give their testimony in witnessing to other souls what the Saviour has done for them. Their life is transformed; I can affirm it—I, their happy mother.

“I can affirm again, to the glory of God, that it is no delusion; it is not imagination; still less is it by mesmerism or other such influences that my children and I have been converted. But for us, as for many others, consecrated lives, and hearts filled with the love of souls, have spoken more clearly than ten thousand discourses.

“Oh! may the Lord give to those who have brought us so much good in spite of persecution and the calumnies of their enemies, blessing upon blessing, that they may reap in our dear Switzerland an abundant harvest of saved souls. Amen!”


An idea of the solid respect and sympathy which the work had gained in Geneva, may be gathered from the fact that on the 11th of January upwards of 50 Swiss citizens, many of them gentlemen of position and influence in the city, enrolled themselves as officers of order and posted themselves at the doors in the passages and various parts of the Reformation Hall each evening when the meetings were held there. They continued their generous services in the most kind and courteous manner (though often having rather rough work) until the meetings were closed.





CHAPTER IV.





On the day of her expulsion, Miss Booth addressed an appeal to the Grand Council of Geneva against the decree of M. Héridier. The following is the text of the Appeal:—

“To the President and Members of the Council of State.





“Gentlemen,—I have to-day received notice of the decree of the Department of Justice and Police, withdrawing from me the permission to reside in the Canton of Geneva, and enjoining my departure from that Canton this day before 6 o’clock in the evening. The one reason alleged for this decision is that the Salvation Army has made several collections of money the use of which has not yet been accounted for in spite of the summons which I received from the authorities. My reply is, I have never myself made any collection, and have never touched the money collected. I am not the Treasurer of the Salvation Army, and the accounts are not in my hands. It was thus impossible for me to respond up to this moment to the demand which was made of me. I gave the fullest explanation to the persons who interrogated me. The only collections which were made were those made at the doors of our meetings. There has never been any collection made from house to house by members of the Salvation Army. I have not been guilty of any act whatsoever which would justify my deprivation of the permission to reside in Geneva, consequently, strong in the sense of right and my own conscience, I come to request you, gentlemen, to annul the decree of expulsion published against me to-day by the Department of Justice and Police.

“Yours respectfully,

(Signed)      “Catherine Booth.”





In conformity with the Genevese law the Council of State appointed one of its members to hear Miss Booth on the subject of her appeal. She therefore came back from Lausanne to Geneva under a safe-conduct, in order to appear before the Councillor of State delegated to hear her. This took place on February 26th. The British Consul at Geneva supported her by his presence at the interview. Miss Booth pleaded before the Councillor of State, with clearness and earnestness, against the reasons alleged for her expulsion. She reiterated the fact that the meetings of the Salvation Army had always been held in private halls, that is to say, halls belonging to private persons, or to societies, such as the Salle de la Rive Droite, du Casino, de la Reformation, du Terraillet, des Grottes, &c.; entrance to the former was entirely free, and for the others cards of invitation were given, showing that they were private meetings. They were never closed to the representatives of the public authorities. The meetings, she avowed, had been several times interrupted by noise and uproar; personal assaults even had been made in the street. Miss Booth distinctly asserted that she had never been the means, by a single word or act, of stirring up such manifestations. She appealed to the fact of her permission of residence having been granted for a year by the Council of State at the end of this long series of meetings in connection with which these very disturbances had taken place. Had they thought her responsible for the disturbances, they might then and there have withheld the permission. It was only four days, she reminded them, after this permission that the Council of State issued its decree for closing the meetings. That decree had been scrupulously respected by members of the Salvation Army, and since its publication Miss Booth asserted she had lived in a most retired manner, having accepted the hospitality of the family of M. Lenoir, in whose house she was at the moment she received the warrant of expulsion. Concerning these statements of Miss Booth in her own defence, the Federal Government itself in its rejection of her appeal four months later says, “The accuracy of the facts here recorded by Miss Booth to the Council of State of Geneva cannot be disputed.” The Councillor of State appointed to hear Miss Booth apparently assented to the justice of these arguments. With a shrug of the shoulders he replied that these grounds alleged by the Department of Justice and Police for her expulsion were “only pretexts.” “It is not in truth for these reasons that you have been expelled; it is on account of the noise you have made” (bruit). Miss Booth, astonished, asked, “Do you then tell me, sir, that false pretexts were made use of for my expulsion?” The Councillor replied hesitatingly, and somewhat apologetically, “These were only pretexts.” He then spoke of Madame de Gasparin ... “a most distinguished lady, belonging to one of the most ancient families of Geneva,” ... &c., &c. Was the opinion expressed by Madame de Gasparin the true pretext then for the expulsion? It would seem so in some degree. “You are young women,” said the Councillor: “it is not in accordance with our ideas and customs that young women should appear in public. We are froissés by it.” To this Miss Booth replied, with a sorrowful earnestness, and using great plainness of speech, “Listen to me, I beg of you, sir. It is contrary, you tell me, to your sense of what is right and becoming that young women should preach the Gospel. Now, if Miss Charlesworth and I had come to Geneva to act in one of your theatres, I have no doubt we should have met with sympathy and approval from your public. We could have sung and danced on your stage; we could have dressed in a manner very different from, and much less modestly than you see us dressed; we could have appeared before a miscellaneous audience, men and women, young and old, and of every class; members of the Grand Council, M. Héridier himself, and others, would have come to see us act; we should have got money; Geneva would have paid ungrudgingly in that case; and you would all have sat and approved; you would have clapped your hands and applauded us; you would have brought your wives and daughters to see us, and they also would have applauded. There would be nothing to froisser you, no immorality in all that, according to your ideas and customs. The ‘noise’ we would have thus made would not have been a cause of our expulsion. But when women come to try and save some of the 40,000 or 50,000 of your miserable, scoffing, irreligious population who never enter any place of worship, when they come with hearts full of pity and love for the ignorant and sinful, and stand up to tell the glad tidings of salvation to these rebels, this mob among whom many accept the tidings with eager joy,—then you cry out that this is unseemly and immodest; you would not bring your wives and daughters to hear us speak of Jesus, though you would bring them to hear us if we danced and sang upon the stage of your theatre. Now you have expelled us; but still there are these multitudes in Geneva who are dark, lost, unsaved; and you know it. There they are; they exist. What will you do with them? Say—what will you do? Are they not a danger? Does not their lost condition cry out against you?” The Councillor of State was silent; he sank into his chair in a state of temporary collapse. For the moment, at least, the reality of the picture presented to him had touched his heart; his manner was softened, though perturbed.

I may be permitted to commend the above arguments to others besides this Genevan Councillor. Fathers and mothers have said, “We cannot approve of, or think it right, that young women should come forward as evangelists in that way;” and some have expressed a fear lest their daughters should attend any meeting addressed by Miss Booth, or be dangerously attracted by her example. These same parents, in some cases professedly Christian parents, are in the habit of taking their daughters to the theatres; in those theatres they may often see girls younger than our young Evangelists, in every kind of attire—in male dress, or scarcely any dress at all—performing their part in passionate love scenes, it may be, for the amusement of the public. “Do you, then,” I would ask these parents, “approve of young women coming forward publicly in this way?” If you reply “No”—(and probably you would not desire your daughters to follow that example),—then I ask, “How is it that you can take your daughters to witness performances by young women which you disapprove?” If you answer, “Yes,” then I would only ask you,—What is your religion? Whence do you derive your principles of right and wrong? As Christians who read the Bible, do you find anything in the words or acts of Christ which enables you to conclude that He approved of young women ministering to the pleasure of the public,—even, we will suppose, in the highest and best exhibitions of histrionic art,—while he condemned their giving any public testimony for Him and for the Gospel? I do not find any hostile criticism dictated by an inspired teacher, upon the bold and practical application of the prophesy of Joel, by St. Peter, on the great day of Pentecost which ushered in the New Dispensation of Liberty and of Power. He stood forth and reiterated the startling and solemn words, in his address to the assembled thousands:—“This is that which was spoken of by the Prophet Joel; and it shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy; and on my servants and on my handmaidens I will pour out in those days of my spirit; and they shall prophesy.” And later, at the close of that address, he said, very explicitly; “this promise is unto you and to your children.” Never was the truth more clearly implied, or with greater apostolic authority, that in “Christ Jesus there is neither male nor female,” and that the Spirit of the Lord bloweth “where it listeth,” producing outward manifestations, many and various and wonderful.

In spite of the explanations which Miss Booth was able to make, strong, as she said, in the sense of right and her own conscience, the Council of State rejected her appeal.

The following is the text of the reply published by them to her appeal, and which only appeared many weeks later:—

“The Council of State, on the appeal addressed to them by Miss Catherine Booth against the decree of the Department of Justice and Police of February 12, 1883, withdrawing from her the permission to reside in the canton:

“Considering that Miss Booth declares openly that she occupies in the Salvation Army in Geneva the highest hierarchical position;[17]

“Considering that in virtue of this position she is responsible for the actions of the association which works under her orders;

“Considering that the Salvation Army has been the cause of grave disturbances in Geneva, and that several of its members have disobeyed the decree of the 2nd February suspending its exercises;

“Considering Article 28 of the Law of February, 1844, which runs thus: ‘The Council of State, in virtue of its supreme administrative power, always possesses the right of sending out of the canton foreigners whose presence may be a danger to the interests of the country or to the safety of the State!’

“Having heard the report of the Commissioner appointed to obtain the information required, in conformity with Article 5 of the Law referring to the discipline of Foreigners, February 9, 1844;

“Be it decreed: To reject the appeal of Miss Catherine Booth.”

I have underlined the words “a danger to the interests of the country, or to the safety (or security) of the State,” in order the more emphatically to draw attention to the extraordinary change of attitude, (shuffling it may be called), of the Genevan authorities.

It is a significant fact that in rejecting Miss Booth’s appeal, the Grand Council entirely ignored, and by implication rejected as without foundation in law, the ground of accusation brought against her by the Department of Justice and Police. That ground was the so-called irregular collection of money. These Councillors of State had probably turned to the text of the law on collections of money, and finding that it had been falsified on the responsibility of M. Héridier, they seemed to have considered it more prudent to bury in oblivion, so far as they were able, the past grounds of accusation? The irregularity of the whole proceedings of the Geneva authorities in this matter, the vagueness and astonishing absence of definitions in their accusations against the Salvation Army come out strikingly in the course of the narrative, and I venture to ask the patient consideration of the reader for the facts which elucidate this. In bringing forward a fresh accusation, as the Council of State does in its rejection of Miss Booth’s appeal, they ought legally to have given her previous notice of the accusation, in order to have given her time and opportunity for explaining herself. This they did not do; and she thus found herself suddenly with a fresh accusation brought against her of which she had no previous knowledge or suspicion whatever, and at the same time an accusation so grave, yet so vague, and so utterly unsupported by facts, that it was all but impossible for her to refute it.

The law cited by the Genevan authorities confers on the administration a power of the nature of such as, in our own country, has been occasionally and rarely exercised, under extraordinary circumstances which seemed to justify the suspension of Habeas Corpus, or some extra-legal arrest, in the face of treasonable plots, threatened insurrection, or discoveries of dynamite! Defenders, however, of dynamitic measures for the reform of society, nihilists, and many other dangerous persons drawn from the malcontent population of all lands into free Geneva, have been allowed to write, to publish journals, and to harangue meetings in peace in that city. The authorities only make use of their exceptional powers under the influence of terror, in the presence of two young girls who come saying, “Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand,” and promptly secure for years to come (so they hope) the “interests of the country,” and the “safety of the State,” by the expulsion of the preachers!

In order the more clearly to place under the eye of the reader the whole of the legal case referring to the expulsions from Geneva, I must take a step forward in the narrative in the matter of dates, by introducing at this point the appeal made by Miss Booth a few months later to a higher tribunal, to the Federal Council itself, at Berne. It seems desirable to give the whole of this rather lengthy document and of the reply to it of the Federal Council, for those—and there are not a few—who have so far had only a fragmentary, and sometimes a garbled account of the case presented to them, and who desire to know on which side justice is to be found:—

TO THE HIGH FEDERAL COUNCIL OF THE SWISS CONFEDERATION.





To MM. the President and Members of the Council:

Gentlemen,—Catherine Booth, eldest daughter of William and Catherine Booth, the latter living at 114, Clapton Common, London, subject of Her Britannic Majesty, has the honour to appeal to your high authority against:

1.

A Judgment of the Council of State of the Canton of Geneva, bearing date 2nd of last March, rejecting her appeal against a decree of the Department of Justice and Police of the same Canton, of the date 12th February, last, which withdrew from her the permission to reside in the Canton of Geneva, and directed her to quit the territory.

2.

Against the above-mentioned order of the Department of Justice and Police itself.



The rejection of her appeal to the Genevese Council of State not having been communicated to the Appellant until the date of the 25th March, the lateness of the presentation of the present appeal is thereby explained.

Miss Booth grounds her appeal upon the following facts and arguments:—

(Here follows an explicit statement of the facts and events, which have already been described in this narrative, after which the appeal is continued.)

The Appellant as a subject of Her Britannic Majesty claims the privileges of the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce, and Establishment drawn up the 6th September, 1855, and ratified 8th February, 1856, between the Swiss Confederation and Her Majesty the Queen of Great Britain and Ireland. “This Treaty is based on the principle of a complete reciprocity between the ressortissants of each country.[18] It gives to the subjects of Her Britannic Majesty, the right of residing in any Swiss Canton on the same conditions and on the same footing enjoyed by the citizens of every other Swiss Canton. Consequently, British subjects are, together with their families, free to enter, to establish themselves, and to reside in any and all parts of the Swiss territory, on the same condition on which the Swiss themselves are permitted to enter, establish themselves, and reside in the United Kingdom of Great Britain, that is to say, on condition that they conform to the laws of the country.” The State Council of the Canton of Geneva appears to have misunderstood the terms of this International Treaty, since it withdrew from the Appellant on the 12th February, 1883, the permission to reside in the Canton of Geneva, which permission had been granted her on the preceding 29th January. Neither the decree of the Department of Justice and Police of the 12th February, nor that of the Council of State of the 2nd March following, pointed out any infraction whatsoever, on the part of the Appellant, of the laws of the Canton or those of the Swiss Confederation. The sole reason advanced by the Department of Justice and Police was the fact that the Appellant did not give an account to the authorities of the use of the money collections which were made in the meetings of the Salvation Army. Now, in the first place, the Appellant has never had the charge of the money, nor any charge whatever in connection with these collections. In the second place, the Genevese laws impose no obligation to render any account to the authorities of such collections. The Police Regulation of the 4th March, 1879, only places under this obligation those persons who have received from a competent authority a license to make collections of money from house to house or in the public streets. Such collections as these have never been made by the Appellant or by any member of the Salvation Army. The Council of State have in fact acknowledged the invalidity of this ground of accusation by refraining from reproducing it (in their rejection of the appeal of the Appellant), and by substituting in its place an accusation of an entirely different nature, in regard to which alone the Appellant has now to render her reply. The ground of expulsion now alleged by the Council of State of the Canton of Geneva may be examined from seven points of view (to which the appeal presently refers).

The Appellant, it appears, then, was expelled from the Canton, not for any personal acts of her own, but for the actions of a group of persons, as it is professed, for which the Council of State hold the Appellant responsible. It is important to understand clearly that the Council of State does not lay to the charge of the Appellant any personal act whatsoever. This is most important from the point of view of the interpretation and application of the Treaty of Friendship and Establishment, for it results on the confession even of the Genevese authorities themselves, that the Appellant has never broken any of the laws of the country, and that consequently she has the right to place herself under the protection of the above named Treaty. The ground upon which the Council of State rests her expulsion is, the responsibility of the Appellant to the Genevese authorities concerning the action of a group which receives its orders from her in virtue of the “lofty hierarchical position” which the Appellant occupies in the Salvation Army at Geneva.


I.





Is the Council of State of Geneva qualified to appreciate officially the degree of responsibility of such and such members of the Salvation Army resulting from the internal organization of that Society?

No.

Because, First: The Council of State evidently possesses no documents sufficient to enable it to establish the degrees of subordination, to which members of the Salvation Army may be required to submit, and the amount of responsibility which the leaders of that Army are charged with in regard to those under them.

Secondly: Does the Council of State possess such documents? If it does it is at least doubtful whether it would be justified in giving them an official sanction, and attributing to them legal consequences. It would be thus giving to them an importance which no Government has ever yet attributed to them.


II.





Even admitting a certain responsibility on the part of the Appellant in regard to the actions of members of the Salvation Army, it remains yet to be proved of what nature the acts are to which this responsibility applies. It is evident that they can only be acts which have been ordered to be performed by the Appellant. Even if the most complete and official resemblance were to be admitted between the Salvation Army and that which is commonly called an Army, and even supposing the Appellant were the General-in-Chief of that Army, it is clear that it would be impossible to lay to her charge the private acts of the soldiers under her. No general of an army has ever been held personally responsible for individual crimes or offences perpetrated by his soldiers. It is not therefore sufficient in order to prove the responsibility of the Appellant toward the Genevese Government that it should be proved that members of the Society in which she occupies a high position, should have rendered themselves guilty of a contravention of a Governmental regulation. It must be established that that contravention was perpetrated on her own order. Now the Council of State never asserts that this has been the case.


III.





Moreover, the Council of State does not define any one of the acts of which it makes the Appellant responsible. It neither indicates the persons whom it holds guilty nor the circumstances in which they have committed any offence. It is left to be understood only that there has been a contravention of the order by which the Council of State, on the 2nd February, temporarily suspended the exercises of the Salvation Army. No other act whatsoever is attributed to the persons for whose conduct the Appellant is held responsible. It is essential to note this point. Now, in coming to the question of these contraventions of the decree of the 2nd February, it is very difficult to give any exact definition of their nature. First of all, it is necessary to know what it is which the Council of State wished to suspend temporarily. Secondly, whether it had the right to order this suspension. When the Council of State was questioned by the members of the Salvation Army and other persons on the former point, it never gave any definite or categorical explanation which could serve as a rule of conduct; and with regard to the second point it is evident that the decree could not claim to extend to meetings held in a private house in which certain members of the Salvation Army may have taken part. Now it is a matter of public notoriety in Geneva that since the issue of the decree of the Council of State the public “exercises” of the Army have completely ceased throughout the Canton. The Appellant defies the Council of State to establish the contrary. It is very possible that certain members of the Salvation Army may since then have participated as individuals in religious meetings to which they have been invited by private persons at their own private houses; but there is no contravention of the decree of the Council of State in such an act; and, further, these are private actions for which the Appellant is in no way whatever responsible.


IV.





But if it were established that this order had been contravened, and that the Appellant herself was responsible for this, that would not suffice to justify her expulsion. The Treaty of Establishment guarantees to the subjects of Her Britannic Majesty free residence throughout the extent of the Swiss territory, the only condition being that they shall conform to the laws of the country. Now what is the sense and the exact meaning of this condition? Would the breaking of a law, or of a simple police regulation be sufficient to deprive a Swiss of the right of residing in England, or a subject of Her Britannic Majesty from the right of residing in Switzerland? Evidently not. To justify such a punishment, it is necessary that there should be a certain character of grave and persistent resistance of the law. The decree of the 2nd February does not cite any penal clause whatsoever authorising the execution of its order, so that in the case of any contravention of the decree on the part of a Swiss citizen no ground would exist for a prosecution against such. How, then, can it be admitted that when the offence is committed by a foreigner, that foreigner can be punished by expulsion—a penalty much heavier than a fine or certain days of imprisonment? The Treaty of Establishment lays it down as a principle, in its first Article, that British subjects may be permitted to reside in every Swiss Canton, on the same condition and on the same footing as citizens of other Swiss Cantons. British subjects, then, cannot be expelled from any Canton except under the same circumstances in which a Swiss citizen could be so expelled. These circumstances are all specified by Article 45 of the Federal Constitution; but the Geneva Council of State does not cite any one of them to the charge of those who are expelled by it. The fact then even of a contravention of the temporary police order of the 2nd February, would be for those who have been guilty of it, an insufficient reason for expulsion.


V.





The Council of State is itself so convinced of the insufficiency of this ground of accusation, that it has deemed it necessary to cite against the Appellant an article of the Genevese law of the 9th February, 1844, concerning police regulations in regard to foreigners, in the terms of which “the Council of State in virtue of its supreme administrative power has always the right to send out of the Canton foreigners whose presence there may imperil the interests of the country or the security of the State.” This declaration is analogous to that of Article 70 of the Federal Constitution, in which it is stated that “the Confederation has the right to expel from its territory foreigners whose presence may compromise the internal or external security of Switzerland.” These are measures of public safety which every State has maintained the right to take in circumstances of a character eminently exceptional. Now what amount of weight has this article of the Genevese law in the presence of the Anglo-Swiss Treaty of Establishment? This declaration of the Genevese law bears the date of 1844. At that epoch the Swiss Confederation did not possess the legal competence which it possesses to day, nor did international relations at that period rest on so sound a basis. The maintenance of treaties with foreign States is a matter for which the Confederation is alone responsible. In any case of an appeal on the part of a foreigner against a breach on the part of the Cantonal Government of the International Treaty, which protects him in Switzerland, it is the Federal authority alone which is competent to take in regard to the foreigner and of his own Government the responsibility of the incriminated act, and of the grounds upon which that act rests. Under these circumstances, it is allowable to ask oneself if the declaration pronounced in the Genevese law of 1844, founded upon the supreme administrative power of the Council of State and anterior to the Federal Constitution of 1848, has not somewhat lost its significance. It must be noticed besides that this declaration is also anterior to the Anglo-Swiss Treaty which is based upon the Federal Constitution of 1848.

But whatever may be said of this point of law it is not at all necessary to insist upon it in the presence of the inability of the Council of State of Geneva to establish or even to explain in what manner the presence of the Appellant and a few of her friends upon Genevese soil has imperilled “the interests of the country or the security of the State.” In so grave a question involving the application of an international treaty whose stipulations are reciprocal, it is not sufficient to quote a single article of a law, or simply to express an opinion. It is necessary that facts should be brought forward and proved. The Council of State of Geneva is bound therefore—First, to define the facts to which it alludes, and then to furnish the proof of the existence of such facts. Secondly, it is bound to demonstrate the manner in which these facts have “imperilled the interests of the country or the security of the State.” Until the moment when it shall have defined these facts and demonstrated their existence, the grounds upon which it bases its decree of expulsion cannot be admitted by any reasonable person.

In fact, no one can believe, unless furnished with distinct proof of the same, that the few adherents of the Salvation Army, whose actions have been limited to the announcement at Geneva in private houses of the same evangelistic truths which are daily preached in all the Reformed Churches of Switzerland, and who cannot be accused of any want of regard toward the Constitution, the Government, or the people of Switzerland, can have placed in peril the interests of any part of Switzerland or the security of any part of the State; while the things which may indeed injure the interests of Switzerland are, the absence of any security for the foreigner who may be dwelling here; public disturbances which are allowed to continue unchecked; the prevalence abroad of the idea that any foreigner coming here is, without appeal and without mercy, at the disposal of the police.

But the Appellant has too much confidence in the wisdom of the Federal High Council to suppose that it is needful to point out to it that neither she nor her friends can be held responsible for the troubles which accompanied their residence in Geneva, and of which they themselves have been the chief victims. It would be as true to say that a person robbed is responsible for the robbery committed to his injury, or a murdered person for the crime which has cost him his life.

The Appellant can confidently affirm that she and her friends have conformed to every direction which has been laid down for them by the authorities; that the two or three advertisements placarded on the walls at the beginning of their sojourn in Geneva received, as the law prescribes, the sanction of the police; that these advertisements were put aside the moment it was stated that they had had a bad effect, and that the same was the case in regard to the musical instruments commonly in use among them in England, as soon as it was perceived that these instruments produced a painful effect upon Genevese ears.


VI.





The weight of the allegations concerning “grave disturbances,” and in general concerning the fatal consequences to the interests of the country brought about by the presence in Geneva of certain members of the Salvation Army, is considerably lessened by a close examination of certain dates. It has already been said that the Salvation Army held in Geneva during the months of December and January, seventy-three meetings, a certain number of which were accompanied by disturbances in the halls or in the streets. Let it be remembered, however, that it was on the 29th January that the Department of Justice and Police granted the Appellant her permission to reside in Geneva for a year. The exercises of the Salvation Army were suspended on the 2nd February, and the Appellant was expelled on the 12th February. Now, between these two dates (the 29th January and the 12th February) no disturbance had occurred of greater gravity than those which preceded those dates. A comparison of these dates shows that the disturbances mentioned by the Council of State in order to justify the expulsion of the Appellant had existed in the same degree before the 29th of January, the day on which her official permission of residence was granted to her. That is to say, that identical circumstances had not been previously judged by the Council of State to be of a nature to justify the withdrawal of her permission to reside in the Canton. The only new fact which had occurred was the pretended contravention of the decree of the 2nd February. (The Appellant refers to what has been already said on this subject.)

The Council of State then is found to be speaking in contradiction to itself in supporting a measure so grave as expulsion from the Canton on the ground of facts which before seemed to it insufficient to justify the withdrawal of the permission of residence. Thus we have the true measure of the value of the ground of accusation cited by the Council of State.


VII.





The Geneva law of February, 1844, which grants to foreigners to whom the Department of Justice and Police refuses the permission of residing in the Canton, the right of appeal against this measure to the Council of State, secures to them at the same time the right of being heard by a member of that body specially delegated to that end, and of giving personally to the Council of State every explanation which they may believe useful in order to justify their appeal. (Article 5 of the above law.) This guarantee evidently is intended to allow the foreigner to explain himself with regard to the grounds alleged for his expulsion. Can this Genevese law be considered to have been fully executed when the Council of State, abandoning the grounds of accusation alleged by its own Department of Justice and Police, bases the expulsion upon entirely new grounds with regard to which it gave the foreigner no opportunity to explain herself? It is difficult to admit this. Such, however, is precisely the case of the Appellant, who finds herself confronted with new grounds of accusation in regard to which she has not been allowed to give any explanation before the Cantonal Authorities; whereas this would not have been the case had these grounds of accusation been mentioned (as they ought to have been) in the decree of the Department of Justice and Police. It is evident that in this matter the security granted to foreigners by Article 5 of the Law of 1844 has not been extended to the Appellant. It follows from the facts and reasons above mentioned:—

1.

That the Appellant as a subject of Her Britannic Majesty is shielded by the Treaty of Friendship and Establishment of September 6th, 1855, between the Swiss Confederation and the Queen of Great Britain and Ireland.

2.

That under this Treaty she has continually the right to reside in any Swiss Canton, on the same condition and on the same footing as a citizen of other Swiss Cantons.

3.

That in virtue of this right she received on January 29, 1883, from the Geneva Council of State, the permission to reside in the Canton for a year.

4.

That on the 12th February, 1883, the Department of Justice and Police of the same Canton gave her notice of the withdrawal of the above permission and of an order immediately to quit the Canton.

5.

That upon the Appellant having recourse to the Council of State, this authority, on the 2nd March, 1883, confirmed the decision of its Department of Justice and Police, while changing the grounds of accusation.

6.

That this judgment of the Geneva Government is in open contradiction to the declaration of the above-mentioned Treaty.

7.

That it is not founded upon any personal act of the Appellant of a nature to justify the withdrawal from her of the securities of that Treaty.

8.

That according to the terms of the said Treaty, the Appellant having the right to reside in the Canton of Geneva on the same conditions, &c., cannot be expelled except in such a case as would justify the expulsion of any Swiss citizen of another Canton.

9.

That the Appellant is not in a case to become amenable to such expulsion, and that the Council of State does not even profess that she is so.

10.

That a legal responsibility cannot be founded upon pure suppositions concerning her hierarchical position; and that, moreover, such a responsibility could not refer to any acts except those which the Appellant has herself commanded.

11.

That, moreover, the Council of State neither defines nor establishes any of the actions concerning which it undertakes to impose a responsibility on the Appellant.

12.

That neither has the Council of State established that the Appellant has contributed to “imperil the interests of the country or the security of the State.”

13.

That the “grave disturbances” indicated in the decree, besides being in no degree to be imputed to the Appellant, took place previous to the date on which the permission to reside in the Canton had been granted to her; and not having been judged then of a nature to justify the refusal of that permission, they cannot possibly serve to justify its withdrawal.

14.

That the grounds of accusation alleged by the Council of State not being the same as those advanced by its Department of Justice and Police, and not having been communicated to the Appellant, she has been deprived in this respect of the securities granted to an expelled person by Article 5 of the Genevese law, February 9th, 1844. That (to sum up) the decree of the Council of State of Geneva, March, 1883, withdrawing from the Appellant the right to reside in the Canton, is contrary to the stipulations of the Treaty of 1855, between Switzerland and England, and ought, in consequence, to be annulled.



For the above reasons stated the undersigned appeals to the High Federal Council, and petitions that it will please that Council to annul the above-mentioned decree.

(Signed)      Catherine Booth.





Here follows the Reply of the Federal Council to the above appeal, which should be patiently read throughout.




REPLY OF THE SWISS FEDERAL COUNCIL TO THE APPEAL OF MISS BOOTH.





In re the report of the Department of Justice and Police to the Swiss Confederation, and the other documents, whence are derived the following facts:—

In re the appeal of Miss Catherine Booth, born 1859, at Gateshead, England, daughter of William and Catherine Booth, now living in London (she being at this time in Neuchâtel, Switzerland), against her expulsion by the Council of State of the Canton of Geneva, 2nd March, 1883.

Miss Catherine Booth came to Geneva in the month of December of last year. In accordance with the Genevese law of February 9th, 1844, concerning foreigners, she obtained from the Department of Justice and Police, on January 29th, 1883, and in exchange for the deposit of her passport, a permit to reside in the canton of Geneva for a year. On the 12th February following, the Department of Justice and Police gave her notice of the withdrawal of this permission, and ordered her to quit the canton of Geneva on that same day before six o’clock in the evening. Legally this decision is founded upon number 5 of the Article 27 of the Genevese law concerning foreigners, according to which the permission to reside may be withdrawn if the Department of Justice and Police learns that there exists anything which can be laid to the charge of the foreigner, which—had it been known in time—would have justified the refusal of the permission to reside. This decision is based in fact:—

1.

Upon what came to the knowledge of the Department subsequently to the date of the permission given, namely, that the so-called Salvation Army had organized upon Genevese territory collections of money, of the use of which they had not furnished any account, in spite of the summons which had been given by the authorities to do so, and in spite of the fact that such an account could have been given, since these collections were entered in a book the existence of which Miss Booth acknowledged, but which she refused to produce.

2.

Upon the fact that such a proceeding constitutes a grave infraction of public order and cannot be tolerated.



Before quitting Geneva on the 12th February, Miss Booth addressed to the Council of State of the Canton an appeal against the Department of Justice and Police. She professes in this appeal never to have personally made any collection of money, nor to have held or had in her own hands the accounts of the Salvation Army, which indeed she had also stated before her interrogators. According to her the collections had only been made at the doors of the places of meeting, and never from house to house. Believing in consequence that she could not have come under any law in virtue of which the authorities could refuse her the permission to remain in the Canton if she had had previous notice of the ground of their accusation, she demanded that the decree of expulsion should be annulled. Conformably with Article 5 of the Geneva law concerning foreigners, the Council of State appointed, in view of an interrogation of the Appellant, a Commissary in the person of one of its own members, chosen, as the law requires, from outside the personnel of the Department of Justice and Police. Miss Booth, who had after her expulsion retired to Lausanne, was invited to appear before this Commissary, and her interrogatory took place on the 26th February. The Council of State published on the 2nd March the following decree upon the appeal of Miss Booth. (Here follows the reply of the Council of State, which has been already cited.)

Other foreigners had also arrived in Geneva about the same time as the Appellant, that is to say, on the 10th to 15th December.

All these persons are members of a religious society, bearing the name of the Salvation Army, which originated in London in 1865, and was founded by William Booth, the father of Miss Booth, formerly a minister of the Wesleyan Church. The Society is under the Generalship of Mr. William Booth. Its organization is copied from that of a military corps. According to the indications furnished by the Appellant to the Sub-Inspector of Police at Geneva on the occasion of her interrogatory on the 8th February, the above-named persons occupy in the Salvation Army, or in the group of this Army now at Geneva, the following military ranks:—

Miss Booth, Marshall.

Miss Charlesworth, her Aide-de-camp.

Mr. Clibborn, Colonel.

M. Bouillat, his Aide-de-camp.

M. Zitzer, Captain.

Mr. Thonger, }

M. Vinot, } Lieutenants.

Mlle Anna Furrer, }





Numberless meetings and public assemblies (the Appellant says 73) were held in Geneva by these persons, in large halls belonging to private persons or to societies. The advertisements used, the devotions, and the practices of the Salvation Army provoked some vigorous protests on the part of the population, and the public peace was daily troubled in a serious manner. For this reason the Council of State of Geneva, on the proposition of its Department of Justice and Police, decreed on the 2nd February the temporary suspension of the exercises of the Salvation Army. In reply to a letter from Miss Booth inquiring whether this prohibition applied also to religious meetings which might take place in private houses at the invitation of the inhabitants of those houses, the Department of Justice and Police made it clear[19] that the declaration of the Council of State was formal, and that the Department charged with the execution of it would not tolerate in any fashion whatsoever any participation of members of the Salvation Army in the proscribed exercises; adding that all those who should contravene the decree, or had contravened it, would be expelled from the Canton. Following up this announcement the Department ordered on Sunday, 11th February, the expulsion of four dignitaries of the Salvation Army, i.e., that of Bouillat, Zitzer, Vinot, and Charlesworth. As far as we can judge, the Appellant took no part in any religious assembly of the Salvation Army after the 2nd February, the date of the decree of the Council of State. This is not the case with regard to the four members above named. Meetings in which these assisted took place on the 5th, 7th, and 8th February, in private houses, and according to the statement of Miss Booth, in response to private invitations. Free access to the meetings, however, was granted, and the invitations for the meeting of the 7th February, held at Cologny, were even given from house to house by a servant of the proprietor of the house where the meeting was held. The assurance given on the 8th February by the Appellant to the Inspector of Police that the chiefs of the Army would abstain thenceforward from meetings even in private houses for religious purposes appears to have been observed. It has at least been officially stated by the police that Miss Booth had the evening of that very day engaged Captain Zitzer to retire from a meeting to which he had been invited in a private house at Eaux-vives, and where he had gone.

With regard to the collections of money made at the end of the meetings, the Appellant stated in her interrogatory of the 9th February, to the Sub-Inspector of Police, M. Benoit, that the accounts would be published at the end of the three months of her residence at Geneva, and that the account books would be submitted to the scrutiny of the Department of Justice and Police as soon as her Secretary, temporarily absent, should have returned. She added that the sums collected had been used exclusively for general expenses, such as hire of halls, the necessary personal expenses of the officers, printing, &c., and that no one in the Army received pay. In a subsequent interrogatory, on the 12th February, before Police Inspector Müller, Miss Booth declared that it was impossible for her to furnish further information on this matter, as her secretary was still absent, that she did not know when she would be able to return, and that in fact she (Miss Booth) personally had nothing to do with the keeping of accounts, and in consequence could not give information on the subject. She added that the collections had always been made in the presence of the police, and that they had ceased to be made from the time when she was informed of the Geneva law upon the subject.[20]

Several of the police reports demonstrate, as the Council of State has shown in its decree of the 2nd February, that the methods and meetings of the Salvation Army had stirred up during the month of January great popular agitation, and had daily troubled the public peace, while at the same time they seemed to threaten in the first instance the personal safety of the chiefs of the Army who had frequently been attacked. A letter from Dr. Olivet, Professor of Psychology at the University of Geneva, and Director of the Lunatic Asylum called l’asile des Vernaies, in a letter addressed to the Chief of the Department of Justice and Police of Geneva, dated February 11th, says, that in two recent cases of mental aberration which had attacked women at Geneva the cause of the malady was their participation in the exercises of the Salvation Army. This expert, as well as the Inspector of Public Health of the Canton of Geneva, Dr. Vincent (in a communication addressed to the Director of Justice and Police of the 12th February), declare it as a certainty that the religious exercises practised by the Salvation Army must have unfavourable effects upon the mental state of “nevropaths” or of persons simply of a nervous constitution, from among whom the recruits of such religious exhibitions are generally made.

Miss Booth has appealed to the Swiss Federal authority against the decision of the Geneva Council of State. In her memorial addressed from Neuchâtel to the Federal Council and to the President of the Swiss Confederation, through the medium of the British Legation at Berne, the Appellant attaches great importance to the stipulations of the reciprocal treaty of “Friendship, commerce, and establishment” concluded on the 6th September, 1855, between the Swiss Confederation and Her Majesty the Queen of Great Britain and Ireland. In virtue of the declaration of that international agreement British subjects possess the right of residing in any Swiss Canton on the same conditions as the citizens of other Swiss Cantons. Now the Appellant does not consider that she has rendered herself legally liable to expulsion. She does not consider that she would be found in such a position as that which would authorise the expulsion of a Swiss of another Canton, even if it were admitted that she were really and personally responsible for all which the Genevese authorities have laid to the charge of the members of the Salvation Army. She thinks that they cannot justly impose on her such a responsibility. She rejects the idea of the system which the Genevese Council of State have endeavoured to conjure up with regard to her upon purely hierarchical suppositions in order to make her responsible for acts of which she was not personally cognisant, and which she had not commanded. She adds that the authorities moreover have never defined nor established the acts of the members of the Salvation Army alluded to, and that they have no ground whatsoever for accusing her of having contributed to imperil the interests of the country or the security of the State. Moreover she asserts that the events characterised by the Council of State as “grave disturbances” had all without exception taken place previous to the date, 29th January, on which the permission to reside had been officially granted to her. They could not, therefore, seeing they had occurred before that event, adduce them after that event as a ground for the withdrawal of that permission. Finally, she alleges that the grounds of accusation against her alleged by the Council of State, being altogether different from those advanced by the Department of Justice and Police, and not having been communicated to her, she was thus deprived of the guarantees which Article V. of the Genevese law of February 9th, 1844, concerning foreigners, would have extended to her. In regard to the equality of treatment guaranteed to British subjects and to Swiss citizens of other Cantons by the Treaty of 1855, and in presence of the Articles 45 and 70 of the Swiss Federal Constitution, she considers she has the right to demand whether the expulsion of British subjects can be decreed by a simple decision of a Cantonal authority, and if an article of the Cantonal Police law is applicable in the case.

The Genevan Council of State has confined itself in replying to this appeal of the 23rd May, to the presentation of a summary exposé of facts, the substance of which is as follows:—“The Salvation Army lives by the exploitation[21] of credulous persons. In its Orders and Regulations, pages 61 and 64, it gives to this exploitation a character which is regular and permanent. Undoubtedly, the Salvation Army must, in the name of the public interest, come under the Cantonal Regulation of the 4th March, 1879, on the subject of the public[22] collections of money. The Appellant, in her position of Marshal in the Salvation Army, a position which she has always defended, is responsible in the highest degree, as much for the infraction of this Cantonal Regulation as for the continual disturbances which have arisen.”

After having further in a few words refuted the erroneous statements of the Appellant in regard to the question of her rights based on the Anglo-Swiss treaty, the Genevese Council of State concludes its reply by demanding the maintenance and confirmation of the decree issued 2nd March, 1883.

1.

In accordance with generally acknowledged principles of public law, principles to which the Swiss Federal Council adheres in theory and in practice, the declaration of a treaty between two countries ought to be looked upon as the international law according to which the condition of the rights of citizens and subjects of the one or other territory or State must be governed. The Appellant, as a British subject, has thus the indisputable right to claim all the advantages which the reciprocal treaty of Friendship and Commerce of the 6th September, 1855, between Switzerland and Great Britain assures to British subjects sojourning in Switzerland.

2.

Although the treaty in question has formulated as an international law, the principle of equality in the matter of residence and domicile between the subjects of either country, we must not lose sight of the fact that this equality is not meant to be of unlimited application. The citizens or subjects of one or other of the two countries cannot be admitted to enter, establish themselves, or reside upon the territory of the other except on the condition that they conform to the law of the other country. Moreover, it is expressly provided that the citizens or subjects of the one or other of the contracting parties residing or established in the territory of the other State may be expelled, or returned to their country by a judicial sentence or by a police regulation legally adopted and executed.

By these clear and explicit reservations, contained in all treaties of establishment down to the most recent times which Switzerland has concluded with foreign States, the principle of equality in matters of establishment and residence between foreigners and Swiss citizens has been restricted in a most decided manner.



3.

The argument on which the Appellant endeavours to demonstrate that since the Confederated States in 1848 placed exclusively in the hands of the Confederation the charge of their international relations, and that having regard to the positive declarations of Article 70 of the Federal Constitution, 1874 (Article 57 of the Federal Constitution, 1848), the power of expelling citizens of the contracting States from Swiss territory can no longer be exercised by the Cantons;—this argument, we say, rests on an erroneous conception of the legal position in which foreigners resident in Switzerland are placed. In fact there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the Cantons have the right, side by side with the Confederation, to exercise freely police control over foreigners on their territory. Moreover, the exercise of Cantonal authority in police matters in regard to foreigners has come to be even the rule, while the exercise of such police authority on the part of the Confederation is only the exception. It is a principle strongly rooted in both the doctrine and the practice of the Swiss Federal public law, that the Cantons in virtue of their sovereignty have the right of expelling strangers by an order of police, and particularly in cases of disturbance of public tranquility and order.[23]

4.

On the other hand, it is true that the supremacy of the Cantons in matters relating to foreigners is limited by the Treaties, and more especially by the Treaties of Establishment which the Swiss Confederation has concluded with foreign States. In this respect the Constitution and our Legislation oblige the Federal Council to exercise vigilance in order that the Cantons may not make an arbitrary and improper use of their powers, or act in defiance of the treaties, in police matters relating to foreigners who may settle on our territory.

5.

It cannot be doubted, after having established these points of law, that the police control over foreigners in the Canton of Geneva, established by the law of the 9th February, 1844, has been in no degree curtailed, either by the Federal Constitutions of 1874 and 1878, nor by the Anglo-Swiss Treaty of 1875. There may, however, be room to enquire whether the application which the Cantonal authorities of Geneva have made of that law in the present case in the expulsion of the Appellant, is justified or not by the facts, and whether, under these circumstances, these authorities have sufficiently respected the legal forms and guarantees.

6.

With regard to this matter it is necessary in the first place to settle a question of form. In her appeal Miss Booth complains, among other things, that the reasons alleged by the Council of State for maintaining her expulsion were not communicated to her before the decision, in order that she might have been heard on the matter, and that thus the Council have not acted in conformity with Articles of the law in question. This objection does not seem to be well founded, because the expulsion was decreed by a Departmental decision for reasons known to the Appellant, and the Council of State was perfectly free in virtue of its administrative power, and in order to support the decree of compulsion in conformity with Article 5 of the law already cited, to base its own action on motives of public interest and the repose and security of the State. It had no obligation to observe in this matter, the formality prescribed by Articles 4 and 5 of the law concerning the procedure which is to be observed in any matter of appeal against a Departmental decision.

7.

In the main it must be acknowledged that the authorities of the Canton of Geneva had the right to decree the expulsion of the Appellant. Miss Booth has declared herself that she holds, as Marshal of the Salvation Army, the highest position among the members of it which have been acting at Geneva. Now, the organization of that army is designed after that of a military corps. In virtue of that position, Miss Booth is therefore responsible for the acts and movements of a group of that army which is under her orders. Consequently, it undoubtedly was her duty to give an account in a complete manner, and without reserve, to the police authorities, of the collections made in Geneva in public meetings organized by the Salvation Army. Notwithstanding, this she neglected to do in spite of reiterated[24] notices given to her, and she has never explained her conduct in a satisfactory manner. There is no need to inquire here whether the notices in question were given to the Appellant by the authorities in virtue of a police regulation applicable to this particular case, or in virtue of the right of surveillance and police control over public collections, which belongs incontestibly to every political authority. The reasons alleged by the Department of Justice and Police of Geneva in support of its decree of expulsion (reasons confirmed by the Council of State) being a sufficient justification of the measures against which the appeal is lodged, the Federal Council abstains from entering into the ulterior reasons set forth in the decree of the Council of State of Geneva.




Decreed:





1.

That the appeal of Miss Catherine Booth be dismissed as groundless.

2.

That the present decree be communicated to the British Legation at Berne, for transmission to the Appellant, and that it be also communicated to the Council of State of the Canton of Geneva.



Decreed at Berne, 24th July, 1883, in the name of the Swiss Federal Council.



(Signed)      L. Ruchonnet, President of the Confederation.



(Signed)      — Rignier, Chancellor of the Confederation.





Intelligent readers scarcely require to have it pointed out to them how hopelessly self-contradictory the whole action of the Swiss Cantonal and Federal authorities has been in this matter up to this point. We have seen, first, that the pretext invoked in the warrant of expulsion of the Department of Justice and Police could not stand examination, but was proved to be entirely unjustifiable; secondly, that the State Council of Geneva found themselves forced to abandon that pretext (resting, as it did, on a falsified regulation), and that they did abandon it in their reply of March 2nd to Miss Booth’s appeal, and adopted other grounds for the maintenance of those warrants, viz., that the presence of these foreigners (two ladies) endangered the interests and safety of the State! We now see, thirdly, that the Federal Council at Berne, in its rejection of Miss Booth’s appeal, in its turn abandoned as indefensible the new ground adopted by the Genevan Grand Council, and actually re-adopted the false pretexts concerning the collections of money which had been abandoned by the Genevan Council as untenable.

It is impossible to follow the whole of this extraordinary transaction without a feeling of astonishment and regret. It is difficult to believe that we are reading a record of Governmental proceedings in a free and enlightened country in the nineteenth century. If such documents had been turned out by some inexperienced junior clerk in a public office, it would have been characterized as showing culpable carelessness, a want of education, or an extraordinary absence of clearness of reasoning, or all three. One cannot help asking—are there not on the bookshelves of that capacious Federal Palace at Berne collections of the different Cantonal laws and police regulations? If so, what fatality, we may ask, prevented those Ministers of State, MM. Ruchonnet and Rignier, from referring to copies of the laws and regulations of Geneva, in order that they might verify the statements of M. Héridier, and clearly understand the legal grounds upon which they themselves, as well as the Cantonal authorities, stood, before committing themselves to the publication of a document which was likely to be widely read, and has been read with surprise and bewilderment by lawyers and others of foreign States as well as in their own country. Had the Federal Council called for a copy of the law sur les collectes, they would have seen at once that nothing less than a deliberate falsification of that law had served to furnish the Chief of the Genevan Department of Police with an excuse for expelling Miss Booth. It is worthy of note that in dropping the vague charge made by the Geneva State Council against her of being a danger to the State, the Federal Council—whether consciously or inadvertently—plead the cause of Miss Booth, establishing in their reply the validity of a great portion of her statement in her own defence. In doing so, they are obliged to fall back only the more completely on the broken reed of the falsified law concerning collections of money. It would seem, however, that some suspicion of the inadequacy of that ground of expulsion (the collections) may have crossed the minds of the experts who, we must suppose, drew up this reply for the President and Chancellor of the Federation to sign. This may be gathered from the following sentence in the reply, which I reproduce:—

“There is no need to enquire whether the notices in question (to produce the accounts) were given to the Appellant by the authorities in virtue of a police regulation applicable to this particular case, or in virtue of the general right of surveillance and police control over public collections which belongs incontestibly to every political authority.”





It is a most startling statement which is propounded in the sentence given in italics. Every novice in politics is aware that no political authority in any modern free State has, or would dare to assume, a right of “surveillance and police control over public collections.”[25] The Federal Council show here an extraordinary want of appreciation of the guarantees of individual freedom provided by their own excellent Constitution. They have also forgotten or they ignore the clause of the Anglo-Swiss Treaty of Friendship, Establishment and Commerce already quoted, which makes it illegal to search for, or examine or demand the production of the books or accounts of those persons of either country residing in the other. A well-known Swiss lawyer, of whom I asked information on these points, informs me that no right whatever of police control or surveillance of public collections exists in Switzerland. Further comment on this subject is needless; and, indeed, it would be a relief if the whole of the miserable business could be buried in oblivion.

“Oh! what a tangled web we weave,

When first we practice to deceive.”





The little town of Rolle in the Canton de Vaud, on the shores of the Lake of Geneva, now became a centre of the work for a portion of that Canton. The first meeting, conducted by a few of the “Invincibles,” the persecuted Salutists from Geneva, was held in a sort of greenhouse, which was crowded in every corner. The florist to whom the house belonged, said he trusted God with his glass house, and if it should be broken he thought he had faith enough only to say “Amen!” A powerful influence was felt here. The sound of prayer and of weeping filled the crowded place from end to end. One of those present wrote, “the people had only read books of falsehoods, and ridiculous newspaper articles against us. But the God of truth will open their eyes. One poor old Christian gentleman, who had been in this way deceived about us, was moved to tears, and begged us to come in the afternoon to his house.”

The Vaudois government, following the example of that of Geneva, now lost no time in putting out a decree forbidding the meetings. Owing to the difficulty of finding private rooms, many meetings were held in the open air. The English tourist indulging in memories of a Swiss summer, may imagine that such meetings for worship in the open air must have been very delightful, in the midst of fragrant pine forests, on mountain sides, or in meadows richly carpeted with summer flowers, and in sight of the dazzling snow of the distant mountains, suggestive of all that is purest and fairest in the natural or spiritual world. And so indeed it was at times, as, for example, on Ascension Day, when Miss Booth was met by a number of her friends from Geneva, and a joyous gathering was held by the shores of the lake, near Rolle. The whole day was spent in prayer, thanksgiving, and the relation of God’s dealings with one and another, until the sun declined towards the west, and the company separated, returning homewards “with great joy,” even as the disciples returned from Olivet after that prolonged gazing up into heaven after their ascended Lord, who had “gone up on high, leading captivity captive and receiving gifts for men”—the supreme gifts of the Holy Ghost—even for the rebels who should one day lay down their arms and become His disciples. But not always was it so pleasant or so easy to achieve a Sunday gathering for worship and personal communion. Some self-denial is required in the case of the hardworked man or woman who leaves the house before sunrise to walk a long distance in inclement weather. “Yesterday,” a soldier wrote from Rolle, in April, “we had a good open-air meeting in spite of the police and the rain. We left the town in small groups, like people going out for a stroll, having decided to meet in a little path where we should have to walk in single file. All went well and the column moved onward, everyone looking very happy at the thought of meeting together with the Lord, although it was in secret and at great risk. After some time of climbing and searching for a suitable place in which to pitch our camp, we found a corner in the brushwood among the long wet grass. We began to sing, when we were interrupted by a whistle from one of our sentinels. We sent off a scout to hear what it was. He reported that our friends the police were on our track. We were quite on the mountains, and the showers of rain which fell now and again, did not improve the rugged paths, when there were any paths at all. But it mattered not; we all began climbing again to find another spot; young and old, fathers, mothers and children, all climbing up the slippery slopes together, helping each other, or pulling themselves up by the branches of the trees, while the leaders in front directed them by an occasional shrill whistle. At last we halted, our feet wet and our garments draggled. We placed two sentinels on the heights above, but we had no more alarms, and had a splendid meeting.”

Another wrote:—“Our Rolle comrades are obliged now to meet at three o’clock in the morning; but even at that hour they have not been allowed to worship God in peace, the night watchman having called up the police to disperse them. Pray for our Rolle comrades; for it is almost impossible for them to meet to pray without being hunted and stopped by the police. As the lake is neutral ground, we are in treaty for the hire of a large barge which we can anchor off the shore, reaching it by a boat from the land, manned by strong salvationists....” “The power of God was strongly felt at these Rolle meetings. A tall powerful man who came to the meetings in the first instance in order to break them up, was cut to the heart by some words spoken, and fell on his knees, and another who had been a smuggler joined the ranks of the Salvationists, and both became firm and devoted Christians.”

Towards the summer the spirit of persecution began to rage in the Canton de Vaud, as it had done in Geneva. The meetings had ceased to be held openly; small gatherings in private houses were all that could be attempted. On the first of July the house of a Rolle citizen, in which it was suspected that a few persons had assembled to pray, was attacked by a large and riotous mob. As those within left the house, bucket after bucket of water was poured upon them—men and women alike—drenching them to the skin. At ten o’clock in the evening, a systematic bombardment of the house was begun, and lasted till past midnight. Large stones were thrown, and the doors forced open; windows and shutters were broken and the front of the house seriously damaged. The Rolle Salvationists and their leaders were obliged to conceal themselves as they could in holes and corners during the whole night. The police were absolutely inactive. Two days later several of the Salvation officers were threatened with instant death if they attempted to meet for prayer. Fire engines were brought out to play upon the poor worshippers as they came and went. Another meeting was thus described.

“We began our meeting at six o’clock in the morning, on Sunday. There were only a few old people gathered together. However, the Lord was in our midst and blessed our souls. We met again at one o’clock to start for an open-air meeting. We had two hours walk before us in the broiling sun, but we felt the Lord was with us. We at last arrived at the village, where we found the people gathered together waiting for us by the side of the lovely lake. About 220 country people came from the different villages around the place. They listened to every word, as one after another spoke of salvation. We had not long commenced when a terrible thunderstorm came on. We all went into a barn which a dear friend lent us. The power of the Holy Spirit was here among us. When the invitation was given to all who wished to give their hearts to God to come forward, one big man came forward; then came another, and another. There were six of them, who all fell on their knees at the feet of Jesus, while we sang,

“Reviens, reviens, pauvre pécheur!

Ton Père encore t’attend.”





A Salvationist day’s work in the Canton Vaud is thus described:—

About seventy of us went by steamer to the little town of Nyon, some miles higher up, on the shores of the lake.

As a specimen of the kind of justice we receive at the hands of some here who have authority, we have only to cite the following incident: As soon as we started from the pier we all placed ourselves in the fore part of the steamer, and there began to sing some of our favourite hymns. We had not been long so engaged before the captain of the steamer sent word that he would not allow us to sing; so the rest of the voyage had to be spent in silence. An old Genevese who was with us told us that he had been in the habit of travelling on the boats for the last twenty years, and yet had never before seen any singing of any kind stopped. It is needless to add that had we been a band of ordinary tourists, however worldly or foolish our songs might have been, we should have been able to sing to our hearts’ content; but because we happened to be a band of Salvationists, and our songs were the songs of Zion, we were forbidden to sing them; and yet this is a country where people are so fond of boasting of freedom and liberty of conscience!

On arriving at Nyon we had the pleasure of seeing Capt. Becquet and Lieut. Patrick, from Neuchâtel. We had not been long in the place before the whole town turned out to see these strange “Salutistes,” and of course the devil did what he could to annoy us, in the shape of four drunken men, who, poor fellows, did all they could, in their blindness, to do the devil’s work well, but, as might be imagined, with but little success.





Means and opportunities for meetings with the dear friends of the Geneva portion of the Salvation Army were rare, and often accompanied with difficulties. The open-air gatherings, necessarily arranged with care and prudence, were often very delightful, and the memory of them will never cease to dwell in the hearts of those who shared in them. Under the fire of persecution, and in the pursuit of a common, arduous and holy work, the firmest friendships are formed, and the richest memories are stored up. Some of the poor converts of Geneva said they would be glad to walk eight leagues to greet their leaders once more. One wrote: “I walked that distance one day and I was not in the least fatigued, although I had only a slice of bread from six o’clock in the morning until five o’clock in the evening. God gave me strength to walk and to go on in my hunger.” Having received information in the first week in March that certain roughs in Geneva meant to organize themselves on the following Sunday to disturb a private meeting of the Salvationists, it was decided to worship upon a mountain in Savoy on the French side of the lake of Geneva, where there were a number of quarries. The arrangements were kept strictly secret, and the place of meeting only made known to the soldiers the evening before at all the outposts of the Army in the various districts. The weather was now beautifully fine, perfect for open-air meetings—a cloudless sky during the day and a full moon at night. Miss Booth, who was still residing at Lausanne, crossed the Lake with a few of her friends on Saturday afternoon to the Savoy shore, and went thence by rail to a village near the Swiss frontier. The necessary notice of the intention to hold a meeting had been given to the French authorities, the Prefect of the locality being thoroughly friendly, and affording every facility for a meeting. The spot chosen was a hollow in the cliff of the Grande Salève, which towered up a thousand feet above the spot where the meeting assembled. It was early morning, and the grey morning mist had not yet lifted, when a number of adherents and officers of the army appeared along the road leading from Geneva, with faces full of joyful expectation. Troop after troop was now seen defiling along the paths on the slopes of the mountain, their faces ruddy with the sharp morning air, waving signals of recognition and loving greeting. Sentinels were posted at various parts of the roads in the valley below to direct the worshippers to the spot. Great enthusiasm prevailed at the thought of meeting once more with their exiled leader, Catherine Booth, and all seemed justly proud to be able to give her the assurance by their unbroken ranks that the power of God is sufficient, not only to save but to keep, in the hour of the fiercest trial. A circle is formed, and all the voices are raised in a beautiful hymn of praise. Now all are kneeling upon the stones, and prayer rises to God—such prayer as only such surroundings and such influences can inspire. The blue lake lies below, flashing in the early sunshine; the assembled group is still, however, in the chill shadow of the mountain; but the mark of light advances rapidly. It was here, in the pure but chill air beneath the shadowy cliff, that poor Charles Wyssa caught the cold which attacked his lungs, and from which he never recovered. He had come, exhausted by his labours, to the place of meeting. One who was present wrote “Never can I forget the scene as, while one of our brave men was telling how God had guarded him and kept him safe through a storm of opposition, the first ray of sunlight broke suddenly across the precipice above, and fell on the assembly, bathing us all in light. We felt that the light of fully-restored liberty would be all the brighter for the temporary shadow and gloom.” A very solemn and happy influence pervaded the meeting as the Maréchale spoke of what God expected from that band, and of all He had already done for those who had dared to follow him at all costs. During her address a number of persons friendly to the Salvation Army, and who had been let into the secret of the meeting, continued to arrive. Some boys, sons of Roman Catholic parents, were seen setting fire to the underwood near where the assembled worshippers were gathered, and carefully feeding the flame. Then the meeting learned that the smoke which arose straight and blue, heavenward, was the appointed signal that a meeting of the Salvation Army was being held. This had been planned by the friendly country people and excursionists to the Grand Salève; so that when the afternoon meetings began a large crowd had gathered. The sound of the singing re-echoed along the cliffs, bringing other stragglers from all sides. “Among those assembled were the poor Greek of whom we have already spoken, and many, if not all, of those whose testimonies have already been quoted.”

In order to secure quietness, and to escape being hunted by the police, the meetings in the Canton Vaud were held at 5 o’clock in the morning. When even this early hour was found to be too late to avoid disturbance, it was changed to 3 o’clock in the morning. These harmless worshippers were literally hunted “like a partridge on the mountains,” as King David in his dark days phrased it. The difficulties and toil of climbing over rocks and through forests did not daunt the hunters, who appeared to follow up their prey with ever increasing zest. No bitter feeling was ever expressed, or even felt, however, by the Salvationists against the persons who thus persistently troubled their peace. All they ever said of them was—“They know not what they do. They have been blinded and deceived in regard to our true character and motives.” It was arranged on one occasion to meet at a certain spot at the edge of a remote wood in the Canton Vaud. On reaching the place it was found to be occupied by a tall man in the dress of a tourist. He was surveying the landscape through an opera-glass, but as the whole of the lake and the view to which he had directed his glass was obscured in a thick mist, some of the party suspected a trap, and one of them went forward to speak to him. The man appeared confused, and after a time slipped away. The next day the same salvationist met his friend the tourist on the platform of the railway station in the uniform of a policeman!

The work of winning souls went forward. I take the following individual cases from the records of one of the workers, giving them in his own words:—

“There was X., the bootmaker of Rolle, a notorious infidel, who used often to stand on the step of his shop and insult the Pastor of the place as he passed by, converted one night at a little meeting where he had come out of curiosity. He immediately testified for Christ, for which cause most of his customers left him, many coming to take away work which they had given him. But he never wavered, trusting in his newly-found Saviour. There was that wild girl who had brought such sorrow and disgrace upon her family, and whose remarkable conversion was the means of bringing father and brothers and sisters all to the Saviour’s feet. When the mother, who had been absent for a time, returned, great was her astonishment to find all the family thus changed, and praising God. In such a circle, and before such a transformation, conviction was immediate, and the mother also gave her heart to God. What a change in that formerly wretched, godless home. The sad-hearted mother, the drinking husband, the lost girl, the careless sons, all turned into praying and godly people!

“A Vaudois being asked how he came to be an adherent, replied, ‘Ah! well, like everyone else around here, I was strongly opposed to the Armée du Salut, having believed the newspaper statements that it was a band of “purse cutters” and comedians who drove people crazy, and I had forbidden all my family to attend any of the meetings. My wife greatly wished to go, but I prevented her by violent threats. Hearing that there was to be a meeting of the Army in a wood on the shore of the lake, I went myself, however, out of curiosity and to pass time. I should tell you that I would not admit that women had a right to preach; nevertheless, it was by a woman’s preaching that I was converted. When I arrived at the meeting, instead of finding a crowd of long-faced melancholy people, I found a number of such happy-looking beings, that I forgot all my prejudices, and listened without even realising that I was listening.

“‘The Maréchale explained with great clearness how a sinner could come to Jesus just as he was. Her words made such an impression upon me that from that moment I had no more rest of mind. Though a Protestant, I had never before realized how a man could be converted to God. When I returned home, I said to my wife (who had not dared to go to the meeting for fear of me), “Well, I for one will never speak against these ‘salutistes’ again.”

“‘Notwithstanding I tried to resist my conviction; but it became all the deeper. I was miserable. The next day, while planting “haricots,” I was praying in an agony to Jesus to receive me just as I was, and take away all my sins, when suddenly a bright light seemed to flash into my heart. I saw my sins thrown behind me, and as if hidden by a thick veil. Such an immense joy filled my soul that I felt as if I should eclater, and I immediately praised God for having saved me. My old mother who had prayed for me ever since my childhood, and who was lying upon her death-bed, had the unutterable joy of seeing me converted and saved. How often she had said to me, “Thou wilt be converted yet! God has promised it to me! Thou art kicking against the pricks now! Thou art afraid of the Armée du Salut. Yes! I know why. Thou art afraid to have to give up thy worldly pleasures!” O! I do praise God that he has saved me and my whole family as well.’”





Meanwhile the Maréchale and her friends continued to be cheered from time to time, by good news of their Geneva converts. The following is from the mother of a family at Geneva.

“My dear Maréchale,—It is most interesting to note day by day the progress that our young soldiers make, and the power with which they proclaim salvation to sinners. Each week new recruits are added to our ranks. Ah! if all the powers of hell rise up, and if earthly authorities refuse us protection, we will lean all the more upon the Rock of Ages, who will never fail us in the day of distress.

“The mothers whose children have been transformed know that the Spirit of God alone can have worked this miracle; and they can reply with joy, ‘Far from estranging our children from us, the Salvation Army restores them to us in leading them to Christ.’ It is the world that takes them away and destroys them body and soul, restoring them to us neither in this world nor in the next. Dear Maréchale, all the soldiers pray for you that the Great Captain may supply all your needs. We are sadly beset on every side; the enemy gives us no rest; but, glory to God, we are fighting and not discouraged. Yesterday, Sunday, we had six meetings. At eight o’clock in the evening the congregation was too large for the place, and we had to have an overflow meeting. It was a blessed day for many. We shall continue to pray and believe.

“A Mother to whom the Army has Restored Her Children.





“Geneva, 9th April, 1883.”





It may be interesting to compare for a moment some past outbursts of intolerance in Switzerland with the present events. The following is extracted from the records of the Council of State of the Canton Vaud, in the year 1824. It is a decree against the Momiers,—revivalists of that period:—

“Considering that reports have reached us for several years concerning the conduct of a new religious sect vulgarly called Momiers, introduced into our Canton, and also concerning meetings of that sect which took place occasionally, even during the hours of public worship in the churches:

“Considering that the erroneous and exaggerated opinions professed by the above-named assemblies are absolutely subversive of social order, as much from the point of view of the unity of the family as from that of their influence on civil and religious institutions:

“Considering, also, that the above-named sectaries have placed themselves by their discourses, their actions, and their propagandism in a position of open aggression against the National Church:

“Be it decreed,

“That the meetings above-mentioned shall be expressly forbidden as being opposed to public order and religious peace.

“All persons whose conduct tends to the gaining of proselytes to this new sect in a manner opposed to public order and religious peace shall be prosecuted and punished in conformity with Article 58 of the Correctional Code; and every person furnishing any building or room whatsoever for the holding of these prohibited assemblies shall be regarded as accomplices, and prosecuted as such.

“Every person having permitted or directed such an assembly, or seen to have acted as its president, shall also be prosecuted....

“Given under the seal of the Council of State, 15th January, 1824.

(Signed)

“Clavel.

“Boisot.”





This decree was powerless to arrest the religious revival of that period. On the contrary, it gained for the Momiers the sympathy of many persons who otherwise would have remained neutral. The decree was only revoked in 1834, and during the whole of that time the Salutists of the period never ceased to cry “Forward!” And God blessed them abundantly. On the 22nd November, 1846, the Oratoire of Lausanne, the locality of the meeting of the Momiers, having been attacked by rioters, a new decree was issued, dated 2nd December, in which the Council of State forbade every religious assembly whatsoever outside the National Church. On the 5th February, 1847, the Council of State called out the military force, in order to put a stop to every religious meeting whatsoever outside the worship acknowledged by the Constitution, and ordained that those who transgressed this order should be visited with heavy fines, imprisonment, and other punishments, threatening to drag them quickly before the Tribunals; for now the war of the Sonderbund had kindled a still greater popular hatred against the Momiers. In June, 1849, the Grand Council again put forth a decree forbidding all the meetings. All magistrates or functionaries of the Government who took any part in them were dismissed from their posts. The sixth decree of interdiction continued in operation for ten years, and was repealed in 1859 by the Grand Council. In 1862 the Council of State established the principle of religious liberty which is now guaranteed by the existing Constitution of the Canton De Vaud, as well as by the Federal Constitution.





It is instructive to compare all this with the facts occurring in the present year, 1883. The following is an extract from a letter addressed to the Vaudois Council of State, November 4th, 1823, by a native of Vaud, Mr. Jacques Magnin, of Mont la Ville.

On Sunday, 2nd of November, certain Christians of Mont la Ville and the neighbourhood having assembled themselves together, as their manner is in a room which they had hired, in order to read together the Word of God, to sing His praises, and to exhort each other to a holy, just and religious life,—during our service, and while we were singing the 5th Psalm, a stone was thrown which broke two panes of the window, and which struck one of the worshippers. On going out of the meeting we were stoned by a great crowd of persons of all ages and of both sexes. One of my brothers and myself were pursued along the road with blows; stones and sticks being flung at us. We were knocked down and dragged along the road, and thrust into a ditch. In this condition, when I began to address my prayers aloud to God my Saviour, they filled my mouth full of mud, beat me in the face, and seizing me by the hair of the head struck my head on the ground several times, crying, “Pray now to your Saviour, and see now if He will come and deliver you.” The crowd shouted “kill him,” and other voices said, “No, don’t kill him, but mutilate him.” We were also robbed. They found in my pocket a Testament, and considering it quite worthless, they returned it to me. Then we were dragged to the Mont la Ville, an hour’s journey, the mob frequently repeating its outrages against us with fury, inventing also other modes of torture, such as tying us together, and also tying us to a block of wood which they forced us to drag after us, continually beating and kicking us, scourging us with rods, mocking us in every way, and pronouncing every kind of blasphemy against the Eternal God.

As for me and all true Christians, this is not the kind of treatment which would induce us to renounce the Saviour who redeemed us. We are ready to seal with our blood the righteousness and truth of the Word of God, and as for you, honourable sirs, we warn you that you take good care that our blood be not upon your heads.

A Witness of the Vaudois Momiers, 1823.





Many years have passed since the deposition of this witness; but the true witnesses ever and again renew their youth like the eagle.


